ANNUAL REPORT 2006
Identification of organization
Introduction
National accounts and macro-economic statistics
We serve our customers - SLOVSTAT - We monitor opinions of citizens and issue periodicals
Opinions and Slovak Statistics and Demography
Priorities of 2007
Organizational structure - Contacts
Our cooperation with EUROSTAT
Election statistics
Social statistics and DRS
Economic statistics
STATISTICAL OFFICE OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
What the last year has brought in the field of methodology
We continue in implementation of QMS
ISO 9001 Quality Certificate
The Certificate awarded to the Statistical Office of the SR by the international certification body Bureau Veritas Certification Slovakia s.r.o. confirms that the Statistical Office of the SR meets requirements of the international standard ISO 9001:2000 in organizing, obtaining, processing and providing official statistics according to current standards.
There is also evidence that the system implemented in the Statistical Office of the SR creates appropriate conditions for further improvement of the quality of services provided to users and for the development of the Office towards higher effectiveness.
CONTENT
Introduction
We continue in implementation of the Quality Management
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centre
Our cooperation with INFOSTAT
We serve our customers - information via public database SLOVSTAT
International activities
Human resources
Information sources and information and communication technologies
Financial results
Priorities for the year 2007
Organizational structure
Contacts
The SO SR focused in the year 2006 on consistent fulfilling the tasks oriented towards decision making bodies of the SR, on meeting requests and needs of professional community of Slovakia as well as on satisfaction of interest in statistical information of general public.
In our work, we attached extra importance to realization of the tasks and surveys that result from the membership of the SO SR in the European Statistical System.
The Slovak Republic as a member country of the European Union has duties and responsibilities to different international bodies and organizations, as well as to international public.
All international projects, regular and also one-off statistical surveys that are in responsibility of the SO SR were conducted by ways, methodical and methodological standards fully convenient to professional requirements and fully answering the internationally valid standards of the Statistical Office of the European Union.
The aim of Statistical Master Plan was to propose an action plan that will support development and quality improvement of the national statistical system of the SR.
From great number of particular tasks, both new and ongoing ones that the SO SR realized in the past year (they are described more detailed in chapters of the Annual Report) some of them shall be mentioned particularly.
Within compilation of quarterly results of gross domestic product, we began regularly to publish flash estimates of GDP and employment.
In the field of social statistics, we continued besides other tasks in international survey EU-SILC, we transmitted required data for 2005 to EUROSTAT and the further implementation phase of survey on incomes and living conditions of household continued as well as.
We began works on preparation of the Census of Population, housing and dwellings in the year
We built database of regional statistics REGSTAT and prepared issuing of new significant comprehensive publication Statistical Yearbook of Regions of the SO SR.
In 2006, the SO SR fulfilled in accord with the act all tasks related to processing of results of elections to the National Council of the SR and results of elections to municipal selfgovernments.
The year 2006 was demanding for all areas in the organization - from those representing the core content of our activity through requirements regarding international cooperation, material conditions, information technologies, financial ensuring of our activities etc. up to requirements related to human resources.
Despite challenging and tough situation however the SO SR fulfilled its tasks and duties on the required professional level.
Awarding of the Quality Certificate according to ISO 9001:2000 standard in November 2006 is an expression of recognition of quality of our work in the field of state statistics.
The management of the SO SR would like to thank all who contributed to successful realization of demanding tasks in 2006 and to express respect for performed work, professionalism and accountability.
Title:
Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic
Acronym:
SO SR
Address of main office:
Miletičova 3, 824 67 Bratislava 26, Slovak Republic
Contact:
telephone (operator) Internet Website
Management:
Indicators set for each strategy individually measured meeting the objectives.
Code of Practice is a basic document for ensuring independence, integrity and accountability of national statistical offices and the Statistical Office of European Communities.
Considering the achieved results in the implementation of the Quality Management System, a decision to certify the system by external certification organization was adopted.
What the last year has brought in methodology
Draft proposal of amendments was discussed on top management meeting 19 October 2006 and was approved at the session of the Statistical Council on 31 October 2006.
Two surveys were also included into long-term surveys: One-off survey of prevailing activity according to the Statistical Branch Classification by Economic Activities NACE Rev.2 and FA 2006 - Survey on fixed assets.
The Ministry of Agriculture asked also for exclusion of two statistical surveys: Wine (MP SR) 299 Supply balance of wine and Wood (MP SR) 1001 Annual report on health of woods.
The Ministry of Health excluded A (MZ SR) 10-01 Annual report on young people.
Statistical survey R (MZ SR) 101 Report on establishment and changes of state health organisations and R (MZ SR) 8-99 Report of statistical data on doctor and pharmacist was put into administrative data after agreement wit the SO SR.
Performance indicator related to realisation of the state statistical surveys was fulfilled as in the previous year.
In 2006, all statistical surveys included into the Program of State Statistical Surveys 2006 - 2008 conducted by the SO SR were realised.
Classifications and registers
In the field of administration of state registers, the main activities were focused on improving their quality and harmonization with new European standards.
At ensuring of routine operation of registers, testing of new function of subsystem AŠIS - Regis set for recording and control of new items continued according to revised classification NACE Rev.2.
In connection with the project Operation 2007, it has come to real fulfilling of new codes of prevailing activity on the base of information obtained on groups of physical personsentrepreneurs from administrative sources.
In June 2006, the third harmonised data collection on demography in enterprises, where data provided by Datacentre were used for purposes of imputing number of employees in small enterprises, was finished.
At the beginning of the year, Internet application of presentation of the organization register allowing the users to obtain information on basic characteristics of subjects registered in this register.
Electronic data collection
To rationalize and make more effective statistical data collection and processing, the SO SR has introduced electronic data collection since January 2005.
Since January 2005, electronic data collection was conducted in 7 monthly surveys in industry, trade, selected market services, agriculture, construction, transport and post and telecommunications.
The share of the number of statistical surveys enabling electronic collection in the first quarter comprised 5,5 % of the total number of surveys.
Since April 2005, quarterly statistical surveys in finance, insurance and non-banking financial institutions were also included in electronic data collection, the share of surveys enabling electronic data collection increased to 7,9 % and since January 2006 to 10,2 % of the total number of statistical surveys, after adding two monthly surveys from the branch of energy and annual survey on tourism services.
Further increasing of electronic data collection is prepared in 2007.
At the end of 2006, 21 313 reporting units were allowed to email reports.
Concerning the reporting units, the level of using electronic data collection did not increase more considerably from its introduction.
Share of number of respondents emailing reports from the total number of reporting units included into the aggregate of reporting units is still low, in December 2006 it reached on average 4,1 % in all reports (in 2005 3,8 %) of the total number of submitted reports and only 3 % of the total aggregate of reporting units (in 2005 2,7 %).
Dop 1-12 OPU 1-12
Share of electronically accepted by branches
December 2005
December 2006
National accounts and macro-economic statistics
Information from price statistics increased and the system of foreign trade statistics (Intrastat and Extrastat) improved.
In 2006, preliminary annual sector accounts for 2005 and estimation of national accounts for 2006 were compiled.
Increased effort was paid to works relating to a proposal of new program of sending data according to ESA95, it is connected with preparation of information needed for the entrance into Euro-union.
Emphasis was laid on compilation of accounts for the sector of public administration and also on preparation of Report on deficit and debt of public administration (notification tables).
Priority objective in 2006 was the implementation of allocation of FISIM (financial intermediation services indirect measured) to sectors used by FISIM.
Within calculation, the problem of administrative data usage needed for calculation of compensation was solved.
Significant progress was achieved in compilation of quarterly non-financial and financial accounts for the sector of public administration.
In the sector of public administration, initial nonconsistencies among annual financial accounts, quarterly non-financial accounts, Maastricht's debt and data on excessive deficit and debt to permissible level (less than 0,5 %) were eliminated.
Automated system for compilation of the zeroth version of annual and quarterly financial and non-financial accounts was put into practice.
Progress was achieved also in compilation of quarterly data for other institutional sectors including the external sector.
At the section of preparation of documents for compilation of purchasing power parity, all tasks required by EUROSTAT were ensured.
Within the regional accounts, revision of time series of indicators from 1995 to 2004 including implementation of new principles of ESA95 and methods of their regionalization was the decisive task.
Important tasks were connected also with selection of employees of the SO SR to working group of EUROSTAT concerning the creation of methodology for evaluation of quality of regional gross added value.
Within data transmission from company accounts for needs of national accounts, employees of the National Accounts Section worked mostly on improving of methodical notes to indicators of short-term and long-term statement and met requests of significant domestic and foreign users for data over the range of data released.
In this field, implementation of pilot projects that will finish gradually the program to 2010.
Demanding revision of weight schemes for calculation of price indices of industrial producers and price indices of construction works was realized.
Besides routine activities relating to data collection and processing at the Department of External Trade Statistics, one of the key tasks was improving the data quality provided by reporting units.
8 workshops were carried out for this purpose, 649 reporting units were trained on these workshops.
Works relating to introduction of survey on price import and export continued.
The most frequently applied statistics
foreign trade
incomes and consumption of households
national accounts
The schedule of data transmission for Release Calendar 2007 was updated.
Results of survey, as well as estimate of costs on short-term statistics were included into EUROSTAT questionnaire.
Within evaluation of the quality, Report on quality of structural data of 2004 was drawn up and calculations of required qualitative indicators were carried out.
According to the tasks of the project on statistics of foreign affiliations, extra survey ZA 2006 was carried out.
Comparative survey for purposes of determining of prevailing activity of enterprises according to new classification was also prepared.
According to the requirements of the European Commission (EC), the methodology for business tendency surveys and methodology of calculation of composite economic sentiment indicator and creation of samples of business tendency surveys in industry, construction, trade, services and survey on investment were completed.
Results of economic sentiment were presented in new weight system at the EC workshop in November in Brusel.
Detailed publications with results of surveys on information technologies were issued.
Statistical surveys in transport were fully harmonized with the EU standards in all areas of transport.
Results of these statistical surveys were published in the Yearbook of Transport, Posts and Telecommunications.
Activities leading to obtaining results for railway transport by regions and inland waterway transport of goods were performed.
In tourism statistics, significant effort was put in suplementing and improving the quality of register of accomodation facilities.
Data on tourism are sent in monthly or quarterly periodicity to the European database.
EUROSTAT published basic indicators on tourism in EU countries in the publication Tourism Statistics Pocketbook 2000 - 2005.
In agriculture statistics, Farm Structure Survey 2005 was finished.
Results of survey were sent to EUROSTAT in required structure and time.
Data quality and also rate of processing were appreciated by congratulation letter from EUROSTAT.
Works on structural conversion of farm register that will enable administration and updating in AŠIS started.
Farm register will also serve as a database of basic information on agricultural farms.
Within international contacts, business statistics provided consultations for many foreign delegations, which visited the SO SR.
The Turkish delegation visited the Office to discuss the question of construction statistics in February; the Serbian delegation from the Ministry of Mines and Energy visited the Office in September and again in November to discuss the energy statistics.
Good cooperation continued traditionally with international organizations.
Representatives of business statistics took part in many significant international events, i.e. particularly CIRET conference to evaluation of economic cycles.
Significant progress was carried out in cooperation with IEA (International Energy Agency) that offered retraining for two employees of the Statistical Office within the preparation of the SR to become a member of IEA.
Development of receipts in selected branches of industry
Iindices in %
Development of industrial production indices
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centre
Besides the development of migration statistics system, methodical harmonization of acquired data from administrative sources and their harmonization with the EU legislation were performed.
In household budget statistics, harmonization of survey on household expenditures with requests of the EU was ensured.
Required information for 2005 were processed and sent to EUROSTAT and data were provided to other external ursers.
The survey for 2006 was conducted and survey in 2007 was prepared methodically and organisationally.
New indicators in accord with the EU legislation increased a questionnaire.
In the second quarter, additional survey on transition from work to retirement was carried out.
In business statistics on labour, publication of data on number of job vacancies started regularly.
Wage statistics compiled information on average nominal and real wage for needs of calculation of other indicators in social sphere.
Quarterly labour cost indices, annual labour costs of employers and annual gross earnings of employees were submitted to the integrated system of wage and labour costs statistics of the European Union.
Detailed annual data on level and structure of wages by age, education and occupation were processed.
Information on gender pay gap in remuneration and share of employees in wage zones were released.
In social statistics, except realization of statistical surveys included into the Program of State Statistical Surveys, implementation of international
In health statistics, previous works relating to preparation of the European survey on health through preparation of pilot survey continued.
Terms of reference for contract of technical
Effort was also to show as changes in reproduction behaviour of the SR population are reflected in individual regions.
Prognosis of labour forces in the SR and regions to 2025 contained description of development of labour force in the period of 19962004, prognosis of labour forces for the SR and 8 regions to 2025 and prognoses of employment to 2025 on the level of the SR.
The publication Population Movement for 2005 (printed and electronic version) contains detailed data on all demographic processes derived directly from primary data (weddings, divorces, births, abortions, deaths, causes of death, migration).
Life tables (or Mortality tables) contain data on the level of the SR, districts, towns Bratislava and Košice and also for a group of towns and municipalities.
The DRC developed cooperation with domestic and foreign demographic institutions.
Employees participated in implementation of many projects and in realization of task of research and development of the state program of the Ministry of Education of the SR Changes of demographic development of the Slovakia.
The main participant of this task was the Faculty of Natural Sciences of UC.
results of early
elections to the
tion of processing the results of these elections, the SO SR prepared a register of candidates and posted them in electronic form on its Internet website.
In accord with organisational and technical ensuring of elections, the SO SR issued a methodology and drew up a project of automated results processing in these elections.
It published the results of elections and also posted them on its Internet website.
For the first time in a history, it published continuous results of voting.
In the second half of the year, the SO SR realized processing of results of elections to the bodies of municipal self-governments.
It set
Election
Commission, all district
election commissions and municipal election commissions in towns (town districts) with over 50 districts.
In preparation of elections, the SO SR issued a methodology and draw up a project of automated results processing of elections.
Employees of regional offices took large part in fulfilment of all tasks of election statistics.
Number of mandates assigned to political parties in elections to the National Council of the SR in 2006
Contributory organization, Institute of Informatics and Statistics (INFOSTAT) also participated in statistical activities.
Activity of INFOSTAT for 2006 is completely documented in a special report available on the Office's website www.statistics.sk in part “Annual Reports”.
In the last year, INFOSTAT dealt with 52 subject matter tasks, as well as with 2 tasks relating to services rendered for preparation and processing the results of elections:
• to the National Council of the Slovak
Repulbic held in June 2006 and
Within the subject matter tasks, it dealt with:
• national accounts - harmonization of quarterly sector accounts with annual accounts; satellite accounts and their application in practice; converting the indicators of annual accounts into constant prices in connection with the new transmission program of the EU;
• statistical, economic and demographic analyses and prognoses based on the newest research results;
• science, research and innovations statistics according to recommendations of OECD and EUROSTAT;
• development of applications of sample surveys methodology;
• harmonization and restructuring of the register of business subjects for statistical surveys;
• pilot processing of selected statistical surveys and innovation of the process of data collection and processing of data in the system AŠIS supporting the application of electronic questionnaires;
• development and application of common standards in the area of data transcription and their takeover from administrative sources.
Particular attention was paid to the problems of population development in regions of the SR, prognoses of labour forces, outputs describing movement population for 2005 and calculation of mortality tables (see more detailed in the chapter Social Statistics and Demographic Research Centre).
Particular departments arranged some consultations focused on diffusing knowledges of customers and posibilities of usage of statistical products of the SO SR.
Attention in the area of satisfying the needs of customers of statistical information was aimed at required product portfolio and their early providing.
From domestic customers, there were especially legislative and executive bodies of state administration, mostly the Ministry of Finance of the SR, the Ministry of Economy of the SR, the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR, the National Bank of Slovakia, the Ministry of Education of the SR and the Ministry of Agriculture of the SR.
Elaborated number of pre-defined tables and data files were available for these bodies besides printed products.
Meeting the requests of international and inter-governmental organizations, the member of which the Slovak Republic is, headed mostly towards EUROSTAT, UN ECE, European Commission of ECFIN, OECD, ILO, FAO, IEA and UNSTAT.
In this group of customers, requests in fields as national accounts, tourism, transport, SILC, short-term statistics, foreign trade, science and technology, labour market increased considerably in relation to 2005.
The Information service provided continuously miscellaneous statistical information.
3 449 requests were met, mostly from the group of students of universities and faculties, business sphere, science workstations, but also broad public.
Requests met by personal visit of customer, information provided by phone are not included in this number.
One of the products of the Office counting among the most frequently sought-after products is the public database SLOVSTAT.
It was continuosly updated and extended by new objects.
In 2006, 7 661 users were registered.
From particular fields, the most interested were students (3 381), enterprises, associations and corporations (more than 1000), other public (889), science and technology (738) and state administration and municipality (716).
Number of data retrievals from database SLOVSTAT
In compliance with the Catalogue of Publications 2006, statistical publications were issued continuously both in printed and electronic form.
Compared to the previous year, it was by 6 respectively by 7 more products.
From new publications, we can mention Statistical Yearbook of regions of Slovakia 2006, which provides a lot of needed information on state and development of economy and society in regional dimension.
There are further e.g. publication of EU SILC 2005 - Survey on incomes and living conditions in households, Slovakia and EU - Labour Market, Farm Structural Census 2005.
Except publications, new products are e.g. information reports, where calculation GNP for 2002 - 2005 are reported, Report on deficit and debt submitted to the European Commission.
Innovated products are e.g. data dissemination from foreign trade on import and export by the most significant improters and exporters, from labour market on job vacancies.
In 2006, interest of users continued particularly in publications of comprehensive character, prices, publications concerning living standard and social statistics.
Since October 2006, the Office provided a new service, when it became involved in the grant project of EUROSTAT on support of users in working with European statistical data, I. e.
In this connection, the European Statistical Data Support Centre in the SR was set up.
The Centre provides assistance in data retrievals relating to European statistics in EUROSTAT databases, publications, as well as in methodical questions.
In the course of 2006, 16 presentation events took part, of which 11 press conferences for journalists and 5 conferences for bank and financial
Information activities of the SO SR
Compared to the past year, it was by 149 news and articles more.
In internationally coordinated project Consumer Barometer, inhabitants of Slovakia evaluated trends of economy of the SR and financial situation in household (breakdown on development in grahp).
The object of research Hidden economy in informal sector carried out yearly were undocumented purchases of goods and services, their range, as well as population's expenditures.
Attention was paid also to survey on opinion of protection of confidential data.
IPOR aimed at marketing publication of the information bulletin Opinions, which gives a space quarterly for publishing the results of regular public opinion polls on topical issues of social and economic development of Slovak society.
2006 was the 16
The Edition Council of the periodical exercised more strict criteria and selection of reports for publication in the periodical.
Development of financial situation of households in the last 12 months
average
(coefficient: -100 maximal unsatisfaction + 100 maximal satisfaction
Articles, in which research projects of the Institute for Public Opinion Research at the SO SR are presented, have a special space.
Implementation of the Code in conditions of national statistical system was therefore one of the priority task of the Office in the past year.
In February 2006, the SO SR arranged to this issue an introductory workshop with participation of the Deputy General Director of Eurostat M.Bohatá.
The aim of the workshop was to present the Code not only to employees of the Office, but also to representatives of other departments representing the national statistical system of the SR and win them for implementation of the Code over.
Together with other national statistical institutions, the SO SR involved also into further phase of the Code implementation that lied in a process of self-evaluation of independence and integrity of statistics in the form of filling of European harmonised questionnaire and external evaluation in the form of Peer Review will follow up in future.
The aim was particularly to familiarize a new Director-General with position, mission, and organizational chart of the Office and to discuss current tasks and problems faced by the European statistics.
fishing statistics, harmonised consumer prices index and classification of economic activities NACE, but also many others were developed to final phase.
In order to ensure active participation of experts of the Office in the approval process of the EU statistical legislation, the Office paid particular attention to consistent monitoring and submitting of consistence opinions.
In connection with international activities, employees of the SO SR took part in 2006 at 264 events abroad, i.e. totally 347 individual participations.
One of the significant forms of participation of the SO SR in international activities were projects and grants focusing particularly on application of the European statistical legislation into the national statistical system.
In the first quarter of 2006, Multi-beneficiary Program PHARE 2003 continued, 13 projects aimed at data collection were implemented.
Since January, implementation of 26 projects comprising multilateral program of the Transition Facility Fund 2004, which implementation period end 31 December 2007, began.
Besides, 47 standard grant projects were implemented.
Participation in various projects requires incresed personal capacities, but since these activities are supported financially from EU resources, it poses considerable extra-budgetary incomes for the SO SR.
Therefore the Office puts a great effort to receive as much as possible projects and grants.
During 2006, the European Commission offered totally 31 various types of projects, which will be implemented in the next year.
The SO SR applied for 26 projects and also received all, i.e. 100 % successfulness.
The SO SR became gradually from a longtime beneficiary of external assistance a provider of assistance.
During 2006, the Office provides technical assistance in the form of many professional consultations, i.e. State Institute of Statistics in Turkey (in the field of statistics of construction permissions, indices of construction production and price indices in construction), General Statistics Office of Vietnam (national statistical system), Statistical Office of Serbia (energy statistics) and Agency of Statistics of the Republic of Kazakhstan (creation of the system of metadata).
The Office was introduced into consortium together with the statistical offices of Germany, Denmark, Sweden and the CR that will implement the project of creation the statistical system in Tajikistan in 2007 - 2012.
Projects by category and successfulness
Grants projects
EC (ESTAT) WG + C Council WG + C Education, trainings
Projects (OP, GP)
Bilateral events
Other
The Personnel Office conducted 24 public competitions to occupy vacant civil servant posts, of which 20 public competitions were successful and 4 unsuccessful.
3 public competitions were announced for the jobs of heads and these jobs were occupied on the base of their results.
From the total number of 126 heads, 67,5 % were women and 32,5 % men.
1030 employees were evaluated in total.
The Personnel Office provided education of employees according to the Education Plan for 2006 and on the base of current needs of particular sections.
management.
Professional
statisticians was aimed at support and introduction of modern statistical methods with the stress on methodology of production of statistical indicators in the context of European statistics, with the aim to improve profesionality and efficiency of performed work.
Profesional education included also specialized informatics education, education in legal, financial, wage and tax area, in the area of working and legal relations, public procurement and others.
Internal education activities were organised by particular sections, regional offices, departments and were concentrated on current needs of performance of profesional activity.
Part of profesional education was also posting of selected employees of the SO SR to training events abroad.
To the 31 December 2006, 171 employees acquired Certificate Start and 63 employees Certificate ECDL.
In this field, the SO SR count among active central bodies of state administration, which began with training and testing in the ECDL program in advance.
For needs of regional offices, 15 trainings in the field of ICT for statisticians were realized in the form of supplies, 299 employees took part in total.
836 employees took part in ICT trainings in total.
Language preparation continued in English and France language in various advanced levels and 348 employees attended it.
Volume of financial resources spent for education of employees in 2006 had growing trend and increased by 59 % totally in relation to 2005.
The library of the Office extended also services, either towards employees of the Office or also towards external visitors.
The library recorded 5565 borrowings realized by 3145 readers.
The library fund increased by 336 books and by 98 periodicals (new titles).
In 2006, in development of information and communication technologies (ICT), main activities were focused on realization of action programs for meeting the strategic goal in the field of informatization within the Development Strategy of the SO SR to 2007: “to ensure the level and safety of ICT corresponding with the real needs of the main activities of the institution and its management systems with the aim to increase efficiency of processes and availability of data and products”.
In 2006, considerable part of capacity of informatics departments was used for technological support of projects implemented particularly from the European Union resources and providing of automated processing of results of elections to the National Council of the SR and the bodies of municipal self-governments.
Approved budget was adjusted by nine budgetary measures during the year to SKK 561 925 thous.
Budgetary expenditures approved for 2006 were spent on 100 %.
Spending of expenditures for 2006
insurance
current transfers
capital expenditures
non-budgetary
In 2006, capital expenditures in the amount of SKK 25 000 thous. were approved for the SO SR, of which SKK 15 000 thous on elections to the National Council of the SR.
Extent of capital expenditures was adjusted by budgetary measures to SKK 21 650 thous..
Capital expenditures were spent really in the amount of SKK 21 632 thous.
Capital expenditures (except the elections to the NC SR) were spent on purchase of motor vehicles, thermal
Capital expenditures for elections to the NC SR were spent in the amount of SKK 14 984 thous. on their technical provision, particularly on purchase of personal computers, servers, printing machines, notebooks, photocopiers and cutting machines.
Approved budget
Adjusted budget
Reality to 31.12.2006
Difference
Expenditures in total (in thous.
SKK)
of which: wages, salaries, Insurance, benefits goods and services current transfers of which: PO - INFOSTAT capital expenditures non-budgetary expenditures
Expenditures in total
In the field of methodology, priority task will be issuing the national statistical classificastion of economic activities fully harmonized with the European classification NACE Rev.2 and implementation of new classification to statistical registres.
Effort of the Methodology and Informatics Section will be focused also on ensuring data sources needed for supplementing of registers on new types of statistical unitsgroups of enterprises, i.e. harmonization of registers with new EP and Council Regulation will be achieved.
In relation to users, priorities will be concentrated on providing current data availability in databases of SLOVSTAT, REGSTAT and in new portal of the SO SR.
Priority task in compilation of national accounts will be incorporation of new methodology of accrualization in the whole time series of national accounts.
Further it will be necessary to focus on updating of all agreements, on the base of which administrators of administrative data sources provides data of the SO SR and subsequent incorporation of changes into metasystem.
Price statistics will focus mostly on introduction of survey on market services prices, on implementation of NACE Rev. 2 in price statistics and preparation of specific deflators for application of chaining procedure in converting of data of national accounts to comparable prices.
Key tasks in the Department of External Trade Statistics will be ensuring of survey directly measured prices of foreign trade, putting the automated system of processing of Intrastat and Extrastat into routine operation.
Priority aim is also to make available data to more general group of users via new Internet portal of the Office.
The main tasks will be also ensuring of quarterly statistical data on labour forces (LFSS), including results of additional survey on accidents at work and work-related health problems.
Publication of data on average monthly wage, wage structure and wage differences of employees and total costs of employers on labour forces, finishing of works on surveys on continuing vocational training in enterprises (CVTS3) and on Adult Education Survey (AES) including providing of key data files to the most significant users.
Ending of the project Usage of administrative data will be important for strengthening and improving the statistical information system.
Range of provided information will be increased via Internet website of the SO SR.
In 2007, all activities related to euro adoption in the Slovak Republic will continue in the SO SR.
Phone: +421-2-50236 111
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office in
Phone: +421-2-69250 111
Phone: +421-33-5566 111
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office in
Phone: +421-32-7460 111
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office in
Phone: +421-37-7722 035
Institute of Informatics and Statistics
Phone: +421-2-59379 111
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office in Žiline
Phone: +421-41-5113 206
Phone: +421-48-4323 111
Phone: +421-51-7735 223
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office in
Košiciach
Werferova 3
040 11 Košice
Phone: +421-55-6410 200
Information service and store of the SO SR
Library
Phone:
Phone: E-mail:
Mail room:
Office hours:
vladimir.cicmanec@statistics.sk Po - Ut 8.30 - 12.00 13.00 - 14.30 Str
Annual Report
of the Statistical Office of the SR
pessimism
indifference
optimism
Introduction
We continue to strengthen integrated management system
What the last year brought in methodology
Macro-economic statistics
Business statistics
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centre
Cooperation with the Institute of Informatics and Statistics
We serve our customers
We monitor opinions of citizens - we publish periodicals
Priorities in 2009
Organizational structure 2008
The Statistical Office of the SR achieved positive results even if under demanding conditions in 2008, when it celebrated 15 years of its existence.
The Office management carried out significant measures for a future development as well as for a successful realization of particular activities in order to fulfil as better as possible current and also future requirements of customers at both, the national and international level.
In order to consolidate and further develop quality management system implemented according to the ISO 9001:2000 standards, the Statistical Office of the SR formulated the Development Strategy of the SO SR to 2012.
A fulfilment of this strategy will allow to customers to use statistical products and services that contributes to increase of their knowledge level and so to decrease a risk in decision-making processes in the environment of constantly increasing requirements of customers and limited sources.
in November 2008 that again noted a harmonization of the quality management system of SOSR with requirements of ISO 9001:2000 confirmed right setting of the quality management system.
An identification of internal capacities that were able to redevelop a 10% decrease of the number of employees of the Office from 2007 is very important in this orientation.
In spite of no simple task that was more difficult because of limited financial resources, the Office management succeed in keeping the trend of a successful recruitment and stabilization of qualified, productive employees and in creating opportunities for their further development.
In view of the euro transition, a simple tool for dual displaying of the value indicators in both currencies was made available for users.
Forms of direct communications with main users and providers of statistical education were extended.
Outlooks and requirements of customers were reflected in the production of statistical products and forms of their dissemination.
Verification of conversions of time series of indicators available in the Statistical Office backwards and also working out and adjustment of software and database systems to converting data by exchange rate were finished.
changes in the development tendencies and structures of the economy after a conversion of historical data by the exchange rate until euro changeover.
In 2008, macro-economic statistics were aimed at a development of the national account system in accordance with new regulations and directions of the European Union.
Introduction
Cooperation with EUROSTAT relating to preparation of new legislation and its approval within the comitology process intensified.
In 2008, the Statistical Office also continued in realization of the survey on incomes and living conditions (EU SILC) that represents data source in order to calculate internationally comparable indicators of poverty in the EU countries and special data source on social situation of households as a basis for realization of the national social policy.
One of the lasting priorities of the Statistical Office was international cooperation and participation at international statistical activities in the last year.
The Office was actively involved in initiatives aimed at a development of the European statistical system.
Together with the national statistical institutes of the EU member states SOSR joined the preparation of new legislative framework of the European statistics as well as other activities relating to the European statistical system as a whole.
Title:
Management:
Main activities:
8 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
In 2008, a strengthening of the quality management system according to standards ISO series 9000 continued.
The system continued to increase confidence of users and other interested parts in ability of SOSR to meet their requirements permanently by increasing satisfaction of customers, process approach, development of systematic management and permanent improvement.
The most important task within the quality management system was processing of Development Strategy of the SO SR to 2012.
The strategy is a follow up to the previous strategy and is supported by the quality policy as well as by other policies of SOSR.
The strategy includes strategic declaration (vision, mission, common shared values), the main characteristic of SOSR function and strategic objectives that are formulated from four mutually affecting basic views on SOSR: in the view of institution value, of customer, of internal processes and in the view of development of SOSR.
The strategic plan is a follow up to the strategy and contains indicators to measure fulfilment of the strategic objectives and the concrete action programmes for fulfilling objectives.
An attention was also paid to preparation of process support for fulfilment of objectives of the institution.
All needed changes were reflected in documented methods of individual processes (value-added, supporting managerial and source).
The level of the quality management system was again examined by the internal audits performed in all processes of SOSR.
Recommendations and proposals on how to improve them formulated within the internal audits created appropriate conditions for improvement of the system as a whole.
The comprehensive evaluation of the system was recorded in the third Report on evaluation of the quality management system of SOSR.
The classification society again confirmed a validity of the certificate of the quality management system according to the Standard ISO 9001:2000 awarded to SOSR in 2006.
A favourable result of the supervisory audit pointed out that the quality management system create suitable conditions in order to increase the satisfaction of customers and other interested parts as well as to improve the efficiency of the statistical office as a whole.
Vision Mission
Strategic map of SOSR
Satisfaction of customers Products meeting the requirements of customers, emphasis on quality (an improvement of right interpretation, comfortable access in particular) Relations, Partnerships
To better know customer
To increase efficiency of input data obtaining
To increase internal efficiency of processes
Relevant systems, knowledge IS / ICT Knowledge base, institution culture Financial resources, cost management quality management system
10 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
The year 2008 was a year of the preparation of the Programme of State Statistical Surveys 2009-2011.
The preparation of the programme was realized under conditions of an optimization of the reporting system needed because of a requirement to decrease costs on statistical survey in connection with constantly increasing number of requirements of domestic as well as non-domestic users under limited budget of financial resources of the Office for their realization.
The aim of the reporting system optimization was solving of complex problems within rationalization of preparation, collection, processing and evaluation of the statistical surveys, such as: \ to consider justifying to include the statistical surveys into the programme of state statistical surveys in terms of their purpose based on recommendations of the working group of EUROSTAT from the evaluation of the implementation of the European Statistics Code of Practice (peer review), \ to eliminate permanent duplicities between statistical surveys and SOSR surveys, \ to re-evaluate range of monitored indicators for individual statistical surveys,
In view of the preparation of the programme of surveys the emphasis was put on: \ transposition and implementation coaccount ability of SOSR, ministries and other state bodies for adoption and implementation of statistical regulations, direction and decisions of the European Community set by the Government of the SO SR, \ changes in the reporting system in connection with euro changeover in the SR and with compilation of the reporting duty, \ changes in collection, evaluation and publication of results from the 1.1.2009 by the implemented Statistical classification of economic activities SK NACE Rev.2.
11 statistical surveys of SOSR were excluded from the programme of surveys, it related to following areas: research and development, environment, water management, forestry and social protection.
Data of these surveys will be substituted by data from administrative data sources and from department statistical surveys.
The priority to keep indicators in the statistical surveys was a duty to submit statistical data to the international institutions, in particular, to EUROSTAT based on the European legislation.
Affected by optimization of the reporting system the total number of monitored items included in all statistical surveys of SOSR for 2009 decreased by 20,2 % in comparison with the previous year.
After reflecting the changes in a periodicity of statistical surveys and in a range of reporting population total a 24,7 % decrease of response burden was recorded.
Classification and registers
12 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
mented by a converter to international level of education according to the international classification of education (ISCED 1997);
The main activities relating to the administration of statistical registers were focused on harmonization with the new Regulation (EC) No 177/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 February 2008 establishing a common framework for business registers for statistical purposes and repealing Council Regulation (EEA) No 2186/93.
information about control links between business subjects that are necessary for a right and a full description of the national and international groups of enterprises in the Register of organizations was conducted.
At the European level, intensive cooperation continued in order to produce a common methodology and infrastructure for establishment and regular updating of the Eurogroup Register of enterprises (EGR).
In the EGR project, for which EUROSTAT is a responsible body, some codes were harmonized and the main characteristics of the chief subjects of international groups of enterprises registered in EUROSTAT were adjusted based on documents received from private sources.
Together with routine operation, also development and testing of new functions of the electronic system of the statistical register of organizations ASIS REGIS (automated statistical information system, subsystem of REGIS) was coordinated in the course of 2008.
Recording and updating of groups of enterprises and nonresidual legal units based on mutually control links and also tools for regular automatic transfer, processing and archiving the selected data from the INTRASTAT-SK system extended a functionality of the system.
In January 2008, the first harmonized data collection on demography of enterprises with employees according to new and common methodology of EUROSTAT and OECD was finished.
Since January 2005, SOSR allows to reporting units transmit questionnaires not only in the form of paper but also in electronic form in selected statistical surveys.
The system of electronic data collection is aimed at preparation and availability of the electronic form of statistical forms to reporting units via Internet page of the department, filling up electronic forms by using application programme equipment at personal computer in the domestic environment of a reporting unit and transmitting filled questionnaires via e-mail to the SO SR.
The electronic data collection represents rationalization and efficiency of collection methods and processing of results of statistical surveys.
In 2008, the Office allows application of electronic data collection in 14 surveys.
Reporting units were allowed to use electronic form of transmitting questionnaires from the surveys with monthly periodicity in the following sectors: industry, trade, agriculture, construction, transport, posts and telecommunications, energy and in surveys for selected market services and tourism.
Only reporting units from the area of tourism were allowed to use electronic data collection in the surveys with annual periodicity.
The fact that reporting units were allowed to use electronic data providing more times in the course of the year, because it related especially to monthly and quarterly surveys in terms of the periodicity, can be considered as a main contribution.
The level of usage of electronic data collection did not increase significantly since its introduction.
The units included in the sectors of industry, trade and selected market services use most often electronic data collection in the view of the number of reporting units.
Innovation of the electronic data collection was conducted in the form of development and implementation of the system webStat in 20072008.
A pilot processing at the beginning of November 2008 launched the system.
ciency at relevant departments of SOSR,
14 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
\ possibility to modify different type of statistical surveys, \ possibility to separate controls realized by reporting units and by workplaces of SOSR in regions.
Currently used system eDC2000 did not allow higher level of electronic services for selected statistical surveys.
Based on experience with the electronic data collection, data structure and administrative procedures served as specifications producing new system in order to allow on-line data recording to electronic forms - webStat were created.
A prototype of the system was examined in selected surveys at workplaces of SOSR in the course of November
WebStat system communicates through data objects (ORACLE) with DC2000 system.
DC2000 system transmits data on the relevant electronic forms and allows its personalization.
WebStat system saves filled electronic questionnaires in data structures of DC2000 system in the format used by DC2000 system.
Modules of DC2000 system perform administration of webStat system.
Starting circle of addressed reporting units for the webStat system was created from reporting population actively used eDC2000 system.
Information about webStat system together with generated entry data were generated and send electronically to reporting units registered and actively transmitted questionnaires through eDC2000 system.
These reporting units obtained information about new webStat system also in the form of a letter that SOSR sent by post.
Since November 2008, reporting units submitted electronically recorded data through webStat system for questionnaires of monthly surveys: Stav P1-12, Priem P1-12, Poľ 1-12, Dop 1-12, OPU 1-12, IK and P1-12, VTS 1-12, Energ 7-12, Energ 8-12.
A trial run of webStat allowed reporting units to record data in the electronic form (except of monthly surveys) also in questionnaires of quarterly surveys: Poi P3-04, Pin P3-04, Pen P3-04 a P13-04.
A development of the national account system in compliance with new regulations and directions of the European Union was one of the main objectives of the macro-economic statistics also in 2008.
In last year, the final annual sector accounts for 2005, preliminary ones for 2006 and estimation of 2007 were compiled.
Time series of the na tional accounts 1995 - 2006 were adjusted for reasons of the re-classification of the Slovak Television (STV) and the Slovak Broadcast (Sro) from the sector of non-financial corporations (S.11) to the sector of public administration (S.13).
An emphasis was laid on preparation of the Report on deficit and debt of public administration (notification tables) in regular dates to the 1st April and to the 1st October, mostly as a result of euro changeover to the 1.1.2009.
Regular visit of EUROSTAT to the questions relating to a preparation and a content of the report in the Slovak Republic was held in March 2008.
Another visit of representatives of EUROSTAT in the Slovak Republic was held in October 2008 and was focused on questions relating to sources and methods of construction of gross domestic product for the first time.
Negotiations resulted in tasks for SOSR that are required to be fulfilled in 2009 in order to EUROSTAT accept our method of construction of the national accounts.
Based on revised balanced tables of supply/use for 2000 - 2004 and revised quarterly sector structures for the 1st quarter of 1995 and for the 2nd quarter of 2008, back-casting time series of indicators of the production and income method to constant prices of the previous year and by chain procedure of volume indices to reference year 2000 was realized.
In case of own sources flowing from VAT in 2008, SOSR calculated compensation of small companies exempted from VAT based on a prepared methodology and in compliance with the requirement of the Ministry of Finance of the SR.
Within 45 days after ending the reference quarter, flash estimation of the GDP of the main aggregates and the employment was provided.
Quarterly data were compiled fully in compliance with the transmission programme ESA 95 and regularly released within 65 days after ending the reference quarter.
Data of quarterly accounts are seasonally adjusted in accordance with regulations and directions of the European Union.
The tasks of two grant project of EUROSTAT relating to purchasing power parity - PPP Production of data by 25 member states (GP 01-07) and description of sources and methods of calculation of regional gross value added - Drafting of Regional GVA Inventories (GP 02-08) were fulfilled with an increased effort.
at the section of preparation of documents in order to compile purchasing power parity.
From the most significant can be mentioned: calculation of weights of GDP (volumes and prices) for purchasing power parity (PPP), price survey of selected comparable goods, services, construction projects and investment units, survey of wages in state administration and survey of prices of rental.
Required level in harmonized index of consumer prices and also in indices of production statistics prices was achieved in price statistics.
The survey on prices of other market services was introduced and schemes for calculation of agricultural price indices were revised.
A very important task of price statistics was also starting with decadal monitoring of prices of selected representatives of the consumer basket in the Slovak korunas and in Euro during dual pricing.
In 2007 and also in 2008, one of the sources of improving the quality were results of grant projects and extended functionality of the application programme equipment of the INTRASTAT-SK system.
The year 2008 was a demanding year as well as considering the importance of changes that had to be realized.
The department dealt with changes of the INTRASTAT-SK system for euro transition.
Application adjustments were tested, time series were verified after conversion from the Slovak Korunas to Euro and also routine monthly and quarterly tasks of the department were fulfilled.
The application test of import and export price indices was realized and quarterly surveys on import and export prices that were a basis of their monthly survey in 2009 were conducted in the field of short-term statistics.
GDP - current prices
GDP - constant prices of previous year GDP - constant prices calculated by chain procedure of volumes
In business statistics, a stress was put on further increase of level of harmonization with the European legislation, an increase of output quality of the statistical system and an increase of data availability rate in databases of EUROSTAT and SOSR in 2008.
An important capacity was focused on conversion of data basis to the Euro currency in 2008.
Project activities relating to the international cooperation aimed at a realization of new requirements of new regulations and an implementation of the harmonized classifications continued under participation of EUROSTAT and the European Commission.
An increased attention was paid to a decrease of administrative burden of respondents.
The centre of works in business short-term statistics was aimed at a methodological preparation and a realization of implementation of the classification SK NACE Rev.2.
Conversion coefficients to recalculate time series were prepared, file of weights on compilation of the European aggregates on the base of selected indicators of the structural statistics for 2005 in the structure of new classification was compiled and conversion of time series of the short-term indicators started.
An evaluation of the compatibility with the regulation on short-term statistics showed SOSR was included to the first category of the member countries with the best level of compatibility.
A special questionnaire on compilation of the indicator of the construction production index within the action plan of the short-term statistics quality was prepared and transmitted.
Regular short-term data were also transmitted to EUROSTAT.
In annual structural statistics, files of the final indicators for 2006 and files of preliminary data for 2007 were compiled and transmitted
on time.
The report on quality of the structural data of 2006 relating to the quality evaluation was prepared and the required qualitative indicators were calculated.
Also in this area, SOSR was included in the first category of the member states with the best level of the compatibility with the regulation on structural statistics.
Data files of foreign affiliations for 2006 were provided at voluntary basis.
SOSR within a preparation of the quality evaluation was involved in the test of completion rate of structured reports on the data quality of internal and also foreign affiliations.
The highest attention in statistics of industry and construction was paid to the new classification NACE Rev.2., to re-calculation of historical time series backwards by this classification and to transition to new basic period.
Other important task in statistics of industry within the grant project of EU focused on a decrease of response burden was a preparation of the survey and a selection of the modified circle of representatives for calculation of industrial production index in a base year 2005.
In statistics of energy, the last year was mostly aimed at a preparation of the new European legislation and comments to the European Parliament and Council regulation on energy statistics and also at a control of requirements resulting from the regulation.
The quality of data basis in business surveys was also improved in order to calculate confidence indicators in individual sectors and to produce synthetic composite indicator - economic sentiment indicator (ESI).
Data of sectors, such as industry, construction, retail trade, services and investment were transmitted to the European Commission at monthly basis in accordance with requirements and timetable.
Monitoring the utilization of the information technologies was aimed at a preparation of the progress evaluation in the application of electronic communications of enterprises and also inhabitants with state and public administration.
The preparation was realized in cooperation with the Section of information of society of the Ministry of Finance of the SR and within coordinated procedure with EUROSTAT.
Tables of the satellite account of tourism for 2006 including the employment and the experi
labour productivity average number of employees average monthly wage
mental calculation of the collective consumption of government institutions were constructed by the methodology of EUROSTAT in statistics of tourism.
Agricultural statistics was focused on processing, publication and transmission of the results of the Farm Structural Census 2007 to EUROSTAT.
The Economic account for agriculture at the level of NUTS 2 was adjusted.
Development tasks with a particular attention to the evaluation of the statistical data quality, updating balance tools and also the application of model possibilities and mathematical and statistical methods in revision of time series of the short-term indicators were performed in cooperation with research sphere in business statistics.
Two professional workshops were held in cooperation with INFOSTAT in the field of methodological development of time series: Usage of quantitative and qualitative information on compilation of flash estimations of macro-economic indicators in conditions of the SR and Construction of composite leading indicator -signals of turning points, which
were focused on a presentation of the utilization of statistical data acquired by processing in order to estimate macro-economic quantities and indicators, to forecast the next development and to signalize turning points in economic cycles.
Cooperation with international organizations continued by a participation of representatives of the business statistics at international workshops of EUROSTAT, OECED, the European Commission and IEA (International Energy Agency).
A considerable part of the capacities was oriented on cooperation with EUROSTAT in order to prepare new legislation and its approval in the comitology process.
The business statistics realized many consultations within international bilateral contacts with the Czech Republic relating to issues such as statistics of industry, construction, science, technique and innovations and to business surveys.
The Statistical Office of the SR received for a half yearly stay an employee of the Bulgaria Statistical Office in the field of business statistics.
We provide expert consultation in the field of statistics of industry in Tajikistan.
20 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
A development of the number and structure of population was monitored standardly in demographic statistics.
Information about a development of the population was provided to users; possibilities of data acquiring from the administrative sources were verified.
Information required by the European legislation obtained from the administrative sources was methodically harmonized in order to develop the system of migration statistics.
This significant statistical survey was harmonized gradually with international recommendations and requirements, its content was defined and conditions for its realization were created.
Works on survey of income and expenditures of households continued in statistics of household account.
Conditions for extending survey and to improve the quality of data collection and processing were created; the survey was harmonised with requirements of EU.
The next wave of the survey on incomes and living conditions of households (EU SILC) fully harmonized with EU requirements was conducted and it allows international comparison of social situation of households in the SR.
Required information for 2007 was transmitted to EUROSTAT, data of survey were provided to other external users.
The survey for 2008 was conducted; survey in 2009 was prepared methodically and organizationally.
Labour and wage statistics made available quarterly information about key parameters of the labour market in the field of economic activity of population and remuneration for work that are required in order to monitor
social and economic development of society with a particular attention to meeting the objectives of the European strategy of employment.
Job vacancy statistics was harmonized conceptually with provisions of the new framework regulation of the European Community.
The labour force sample survey was extended by the additional survey on migrants and their direct descendants that improved the product portfolio by new indicators in the field of migration statistics in the 2nd quarter.
In addition the SR was included into close groups of states cooperating on a optimization of the prepared additional survey for 2010 by testing of a collection of selected indicators on harmonization of labour and family life.
The short-term wage indicators were supplemented by more detailed annual information about individual items of earnings of the different social and professional groups of employees.
Data, which more accurate characterized income groups of the employed people (e.g. median wage), were released.
A complex view on the labour remuneration was supplemented by data on other costs of enterprises on the employment of labour forces.
The Statistical Office paid an increased effort to preparatory works on a modification of the wage reporting system and the output formats in connection with the planned euro changeover in 2009.
A particular emphasis was laid also on the introduction of the classification SK NACE Rev.2. to the labour and wage statistics, but data on employment, job vacancies, wages and labour costs were transmitted in dual dividing by both, the original and the new classification to EUROSTAT.
Social statistics was developed in close cooperation with selected ministries, i.e. it dealt with projects of EUROSTAT and also usage of administrative data sources.
Data on statistics of education, culture, consumption of food, selected non-market services, health insurances and statistical data on health were transmitted systematically to the relevant national institutions, international organizations and to the public database.
A preparation of the integrated complex of statistical surveys on population the European programme of social surveys started with realization of the pilot survey within the project of the European survey in households.
A prepa
ration on production of internationally comparable statistics of sickness rate was carried out in cooperation with the National Centre of Health Information relating to the project focused on the pilot collection of data on sickness rate.
Other realized projects were aimed at an improvement of the quality of statistical data on accidents at work (ESAW methodology) and occupational diseases (EODS methodology) and at a preparation of the systematic collection of internationally comparable data on net social benefits in the field of social protection statistics.
Demographic Research Centre (DRC) dealt with 7 planned tasks in close cooperation with
Social statistics
22 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
the SOSR employees in 2008.
The result was 5 publication issued directly in INFOSTAT: Reproduction behaviour of urban and rural population in Slovakia, Women fertility in the SR from generation viewpoint, Mortality atlas in Slovakia, Labour migration in the SR and Development prognosis of population in districts of the SR to 2025 and documents for publication of SOSR Population movement of the SR 2007, mortality and marriage tables.
Information about activity of DRC activities are released at the DRC's website (www.infostat.sk/vdc) and
were also a subject of the press conference held at the Statistical Office of the SR in December
In addition to planned tasks, employees of the centre were involved to deal with non-planned (actual) tasks required by departments that had usually a form of working documents, supporting documents, opinions and evaluations.
Population by age and situation at labour market
women
men
employed unemployed economically active
The other project was realized in cooperation with the Office for the Slovaks Living Abroad and was focused on external migration.
From international projects, the most significant was the cooperation in two projects of all European character, Human fertility database and European demographic datasheet 2008.
Demographic Research Centre was also coorganiser of Demographical discussion afternoons arranged in cooperation with the Slovak statistical and demographic society and with the Faculty of Natural Sciences of CU.
Topics of discussions were aimed at current demographical issues.
A great attention was paid continuously to Internet communication via own website, as well as via website of SLOVAKPOPIN that is a result of cooperation with SOSR and that includes detailed demographic data.
born/dead/migration increase (thous.)
number of population
born
dead
migration increase
24 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
A main task of the election statistics was realization of processing of the new elections to the bodies of municipal self-government in the last year.
The new elections were declared in municipalities, where the place of mayor / city manager is relieved or was not available a replacement to the relieved place of a deputy in municipality / town corporation.
The chairman of the National Council of the Slovak Republic declared the new elections in 2008 in three dates: the first on 15th March, the other on 21st June and the last on 22nd November.
Elections in March were declared in 16 municipalities that came under 11 district election commissions.
Elections in June were
held in 23 municipalities that delivered results to 16 district election commissions.
The last elections in 2008 were held in 28 municipalities and together with district election commissions were available 19 expert (summarizing) units.
After control of all the minutes of district election commissions, the expert (summarizing) unit of the Central Election Commission prepares a proposal of the minutes for the Central Election Commission.
After processing the results, the Statistical Office issues a publication with results of the new elections.
Since May 2007, SOSR releases detailed results of the new elections immediately after a sign of the minutes of the Central Election Commission at the website.
SOSR issued the publication with historical results of elections to the legislative bodies as a contribution to the 90th anniversary of the establishment of the CSR in cooperation with the Czech Statistical Office.
The publication contains results of the elections from 1920 until now.
The results are for the territory of Slovakia, but data from 1920 to 1946 are structured in districts, in which the country was divided at that time.
26 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
Mandates to House of Deputes 1920 - 1935 (in %)
Notes:
Others - in 1920 included are political parties, MNKSS, DDFP, MNSDS, SSČČSLP, MKP.
Others - in 1925 included are political parties, DNSAP, KKSS, AZS, PZLR.
Others - in 1929 included are political parties, KKSMNSW, DNSAP, PaŽŽ, Liga.
Others - in 1935 included are political parties, KKSMNSW, NOF.
DW20, DW29, DNP - in 1920 DW20; in 1925 DNP and in 1929 DW29 and DNP.
ČČSND, NárSj - in 1920 - 1929 ČČSND; in 1935 NárSj.
The Institute of Informatics and Statistics (INFOSTAT) as research and development work station in the field of national statistics participates in activities of the Statistical Office of the SR yearly.
The cooperation between the Institute and SOSR is based on the contract concluded by both organizations for a relevant year.
A content of the contract reflects priority tasks of annual plans of statistical activities of the Statistical Office that are transformed to the plan of research and development tasks of INFOSTAT.
In 2008 INFOSTAT dealt with 30 research and development tasks realized by 54 partial outputs.
In the view of subject specification it were:
\ development and innovation - subsystems of METIS, REGIS and ZBER relating to the automated statistical information system (ASIS); application programme equipment relating to the project of euro changeover in the SR; software for SLOVSTAT database, business surveys, balancing of energy, estimation of harvest, compilation of outputs from sample survey in road freight transport (RFT), calculations of indicators of structural business statistics (SBS); Urban and municipal statistics (UMS) and Urban Information System (UIS);
\ methodological solutions - improvement of the quality of procedures on constructions of the national account system (NAS) in the SR; supply/use tables (SUT) and symmetric input-output tables (IOT); some issues of flash estimations of indicators of NAS and an analysis of seasonality of their time series; issues of price statistics and economic statistics and also updating methodology of
processing monthly data of the household accounts by standards of EUROSTAT to process data of sample surveys; improvement of the data quality of the survey on incomes and living conditions of households (EU SILC) and labour force sample survey (LFSS);
\ analyses - standardization of data and metadata to change data of SIS; sample population of the Farm Structural Survey; usage of SAS in SOSR environment;
\ forecast - of a short-term development of the economy of the SR.
Tasks realized by the Demographic Research Centre within INFOSTAT have a special role (see more detailed in the chapter Social Statistics and Demographic Research Centre).
The activity of INFOSTAT for 2008 is completely documented in a special report available at the Office's website www.statistics.sk, in part Annual Reports.
28 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
The strategic objective of marketing was also implemented further in 2008.
The Marketing Plan of SOSR for 2008, many tasks of which were performed, was approved.
SOSR paid a primary attention to significant domestic and non-domestic customers in the area of building relations with customers.
Regarding domestic customers, there were especially legislative and executive bodies of state administration, mostly the Ministry of Finance of the SR and the National Bank of Slovakia, the Ministry of Economy of the SR, the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR, the Ministry of Education of the SR and the Ministry of Environment of the SR.
A comprehensive number of pre-defined tables and data files, which they used for decision-making and governing processes, were
made available for these bodies besides printed products.
Individual expert departments of the Office arranged some activities aimed at survey of customers' satisfaction with products and services of the statistical data dissemination.
The activities were also aimed at extension of customers' knowledge in the field of statistics and at possibilities to use products for analytical, managerial, pedagogical and other professional activity.
Meeting the requests of the international and inter-governmental organizations, the member of which the Slovak Republic is, was oriented to EUROSTAT, UN ECE, European Commission, ECFIN, OECD, ILO, FAO, IEA, UNESCO and Statistical Division of the UN.
Requests of this group of customers increased considerably in fields such as short-term production
statistics, market services, foreign trade and price statistics in comparison with the previous year 2007.
Together 272 products in the form of different questionnaires, data files and tables of all statistical areas were transmitted to these institutions.
The Statistical Office transmitted continuously different statistical data to users via information service, mostly in standard form, extractions from publications and available databases.
Information were emailed, but also sent in written form or by fax.
Together 3 289 requests were met, i.e. almost by a quarter more than in 2007, there were mostly customers of the business sector and a broad public, from international organizations and students of faculties and universities.
The Internet solution as a dominant trend of the access to customers to products of the Statistical Office was developed further in the field of production of products and dissemination.
Electronic forms, such as Order of statistical information and Comments were made available.
The new application function „export to XML“ was introduced, it realize export of each pre-defined table to standard data XML format.
Since September 2008, euro calculator was made available in tables and texts in value indicators at the SOSR's portal.
Euro calculator was created as interactive „bubble“ and increased comport of visitors of the website.
Offer via free of charge available databases, such as SLOVSTAT and RegDat was extended.
Interest of customers in providing information of SOSR by occupation sections in 2008 (in %)
Business subjects
Broad public
International and external institutions
Students, school
State administration, self-government
Public service institutions
Media
30 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
presented in the form of dynamically generated tables with a possibility to display them also through graphs and maps.
Interest in database SLOVSTAT by occupation sections in 2008 (in %)
Students
Broad public
Business subjects Science and research
State administration, self-government Financial institutions
Media
Number of extractions of public database SLOVSTAT
Year 2006
Year 2007
Year 2008
New technological platform of the Urban and municipal statistics database was dealt with by integration into the database system of Oracle.
The period allowing the availability of updated data to broad public was also shortened.
The UMS database allows data retrievals of many indicators from different areas for each municipality and town of the SR and to define also outputs of different territorial units free of charge.
The most extractions were made in macro-economic indicators, quarterly national accounts, labour and wage statistics, demographic statistics, prices, incomes, expenditures and household consumption.
27 622 different users visited the regional RegDat database in the last year, they realized 31 373 visits and 141,7 thousand data extractions from data matrices.
Users were interested the most in statistical data from the field of demography, labour market, business and social statistics.
Share of tables in database RegDat by thematic groups in 2008
Macro-economic statistics 6,0%
Agriculture and forestry 1,0% Territory, climate 6,0%
Demography 32,8%
Labour market 3,9% Social statistics 9,0%
Business statistics 11,6%
Organizational statistics 5,1%
Statistics relating to many areas 22,8%
The main comprehensive and sector publications are Statistical Yearbook of the SR 2008, Statistical Yearbook of regions of Slovakia, quarterly Statistical Report on Basic Development Tendencies in the SR (which is submitted to the Government of the SR), yearbooks of industry, construction, transport, science and technology, trends of social development.
In addition to the Catalogue of Publication, another 6 titles were released: Population Movement in the Slovak Republic in 2007 (source work), Career of Doctorate Holders in the SR, Selected aspects of employment in the light of public opinion in 2006 - 2007, Elections to the legislative bodies at the territory of Slovakia 1920 - 2006 and Social Protection in the European Union.
A generously illustrated propagation publication Slovakia in EU - Living conditions was also issued.
The Office within the international activities also implement further the grant project of EUROSTAT European Statistical Data Support (ESDS) to support users in work with the European statistical data in 2008.
The European Statistical Data Support Centre of the SR that is working the third year at the Statistical Office provided an assistance to navigate users at the website of EUROSTAT, to search the European statistical data in databases of EUROSTAT, and also to answer methodological questions.
Information released in the part European Statistics - ESDS at the SOSR's website were updated and supplemented continuously by a translation of frequently asked questions from the English to the Slovak language.
In 2008, social and economic issues were also the centre of attention of the Institute for Public Opinion Research (IPOR) at the Statistical Office of the SR.
These issues were the main part of the 28 research actions of IPOR focused on monitoring of outlooks of adult population on ways and life conditions in the Slovak society.
This number of realized survey is the highest in the existing history of the Institute.
Inhabitants of Slovakia had the possibility to assess trends of the economy of the SR and financial situation of households via the international project Consumer Barometer each month.
The main user of this survey results was the Directorate General of Economic and Financial Affairs of the European Commission.
The Ministry of Economy of the SR was another user of results and also information reports were submitted to the Government of the SR.
The quarterly publication of the information bulletin Opinions was a traditional product of IPOR representing a platform in order to publish the results of regular public opinion polls on topical issues of the development of the Slovak society.
Following themes in 18th issue of the bulletin were presented besides others: changeover to common currency Euro in Slovakia, problems of unemployment and employment, investment plans of households, preferences of political parties and movements, but also credibility of the Slovak politicians.
The Institute realized a great research project Euro changeover in 2008.
In the June-December 2008 period, trained interviewers of IPOR monitored information of the Slovak inhabitants about euro, degree of their identification with the previous currency and possible impacts of common currency on their living level in regular intervals.
The Government of the SR,
Opinions of inhabitants of the SR of current development of financial situation in households
coefficient on current financial situation in households
34 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
executive units including a representative for Euro changeover and also a broad public were regularly informed about results of the survey.
IPOR within the programme of state statistical surveys conducted quarterly surveys on shortterm and long-term stays and business trips of inhabitants both domestic and non-domestic.
Some other research tasks and projects, contractors of which were the organizations and institutions of the state and public sector, were also realized.
The issue of the scientific periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography continued with 18th year in 2008.
The periodical presents professional articles, overviews, analytical studies and other reports and articles from different fields of statistics and related sciences.
Articles and discussion reports, opinions and polemics from the demographic field are regularly presented.
Reports for publication come not only from employees of SOSR, but also from authors mostly from different universities and scientific workplaces in Slovakia.
Feelings of public relating to expectations of euro changeover in Slovakia (data in %)
pessimism indifference optimism
The international activities were aimed mostly at a cooperation within the European Statistical system.
Professionals of SOSR took part in a preparation of legislative proposals of the European union in statistics, in an introduction of new statistical methods and in an increase of the comparability and quality of statistical data.
29 new legal acts of the European Union were approved in the field of statistics in 2008, of which 13 regulations of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to classifications, demography, education statistics, energy statistics, agricultural statistics, transmission of confidential data and health statistics.
The adoption of a decision establishing the European Statistical Advisory Committee, member of which became also a representative of the Slovak Republic, had a great importance.
One of the important legal acts was also a decision on an establishment of the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board and on a program of the modernization of the European business and trade statistics.
Other adopted acts were implementing regulations of the Commission.
A significant proposal of the regulation on European statistics, a proposal of the regulation on intra-community trade and on trade with third countries, on information society and two legislative proposals in the field of statistics and agriculture were in a preparation phase.
In addition to the active participation in functioning of the European Statistical System, the Statistical Office also took part in activities of the international organizations such as Statistical Commission of the UN, Conference on European Statisticians at the UN ECE, OECD, ILO, FAO, UNESCO, WTO and others.
SOSR provided consultations to the Statistical Office of Ukraine in the field of demography, census of population, data dissemination and regional statistics.
In the first half of 2008, an employee of the Bulgarian Statistical Office was at a six-month professional fellowship at SOSR.
The previous intensive cooperation with neighbouring central European countries was formally rounded off by a sign of the memorandum on cooperation among the statistical offices of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Austria, Slovenia and Slovakia in November.
SOSR within this initiative organized an international workshop on usage of administrative sources for statistical purposes with participation of 10 external experts.
The honorary guest was a representative of the General Director of EUROSTAT, Mr. M. Bohatá.
Her visit was used also for negotiations with the Office management and a presentation of results of the evaluation of the national statistical institutes in the form of „peer review“.
The general director of the Austrian Statistical Office, Mr. P. Hackl was another official working visit at SOSR; he presented inspiring speech on a cooperation of statistics with universities and science circles.
SOSR employees took part in 237 external business trips in this year, i.e. 293 commencements.
SOSR employees
Types of business trips
Others 18 %
Bilateral 7 %
Trainings 6 %
Projects 3 %
Council 7%
also participated in meetings of working group STATIS at the Council of the European Union, in actions organized by other international organizations, in trainings of the European Statistical Training Programme and at working visits of other statistical institutes.
A development and functioning of the Slovak statistics within the European statistical system is realized also via grant projects mostly funded
by the European union.
In 2008, 13 new grant agreements was signed and implementation of 23 projects that started in previous years continued.
In December 2008, implemantaion of the great multi-beneficiary program of Transition Facility 2005 was finished, it consisted of 9 pilot projects aimed at an increase of the level and application of new legislation in different fields of statistics.
38 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
In 2008, SOSR continued to create opportunities for development of employees, to recruit successfully employees and to maintain qualified and productive employees.
The average registered recalculated number of employees was 995 in 2008, of which 868 were employed as civil servants and 127 employees on employment contract.
97 % of posts were occupied to the 31 December 2008.
934 employees were evaluated in total.
The Office paid an attention to the personal representation of the SR in institutions of the European Union.
Also in the last year, the activities realized within the Education Plan of Employees for 2008 were a base of education of SOSR employees.
Education structure
Education and age structure of employees of the Office to the 31 December 2008 are depicted in the following graphs.
Planned events were supplemented by the educational activities resulting from current requests of the individual departments.
The Statistical Office sent its employees also to the educational activities that were realized by other institutions based on projects funded by the European union.
The education of managers was aimed at development of knowledge and qualifications in order to manage employees, to improve the form of communication with employees, media and with a broad public (time management, stress management, effective building and management of working team).
Age structure
79,1 % women and 20,9 % men were employed at the Office.
From the total number of 135 heads, 67,7 % represented women and 33,3 % represented men.
under 25 2,5 %
over 56 21,9 %
40 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
140 employees took part in trainings of this education program.
78 employees performing professional activities in the field of statistics participated in international workshops and trainings.
In 2008, the communications skills of employees continued to be improved through half-intensive and intensive courses of the English and French language.
492 employees took part in the language preparation.
In order to improve the quality of communication of employees in the national language, a course of language culture in state administration was realized.
SOSR employees in the region of Bratislava were allowed to increase skills in a work with applications of Microsoft Office 2003 in the form of e-learning trainings of ECDL relating
The total amount SKK 2 102 254 (EUR 69 782) was spent on education of more than 3 thousand of employees.
In the course of last year, library fund was supplemented by 1 643 new books and 91 daily press, domestic and non-domestic periodicals.
The total number of borrowings was 5 520 realized by 3 224 readers of the library, of which 2 795 were from an external environment.
42 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
The year 2008 was considered as significant, mostly in the view of future in the field of information sources and information and communication technologies.
Conceptual activities in the field of information systems and their security in the field of information and communication technologies were typical for this year in addition to realization of routine services for our internal and external customers.
In connection to basic documents in the field of information of society approved by the Government: Strategy of information of the SR and National conception of information of public administration of the SR, the Department of Methodology and Informatics of the Statistical Office prepared the Conception of development of information systems of SOSR (KRIS SOSR) that was in compliance of the Act on information systems of public administration approved by the Ministry of Finance of the SR.
It is a strategic document for further trends in informatics in SOSR and SOSR is also involved in processes of information of the Slovak Republic.
The Statistical Office becomes aware of an importance of the security of information systems and begun systematically deal with this area.
A preliminary analysis on the security of information systems of SOSR with an emphasis on the security of election information systems as first step required in order to realize reliable processing of statistical information and smooth processing of results of elections in 2009 was prepared.
To prepare elections in 2009, equipments of computer technology were supplied for purposes of processing the results of all elections in 2009 and 2010.
Adjustment of the budget mostly related to an approval of budgetary measures on public opinion polls to issues of euro changeover, dual survey of consumer prices and increase of budget for statistical survey on incomes and living conditions of households (EU SILC).
The real income was SKK 46 538 thous., including non-fiscal
income SKK 10 530 thous, non-budgetary income SKK 39 008 thous..
The nonbudgetary income was acquired from external grants from the European Commission in order to introduce new statistical surveys and to improve their quality.
Expenditures approved in 2008 were spent fully in the amount of the budget.
A considerable part of the total expenditures, 66 %, represented expenditures on wages and salaries, payments to health insurance companies.
These resources were spent, in particular, on print of statistical questionnaires and regulations, processing of statistical data, technical
Comparison of budget and reality of non-fiscal income
Year
budget spending
44 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
support of information and communication technologies, travel compensations, education of employees, other material provision of statistical surveys, benefit to social fund and contribution to boarding of employees and on current operation costs (energy, security of objects, maintenance of buildings and technologies, transport costs and others.).
Financial resources were spent on performance of the research and developing tasks in the field of statistics specified in the contract between SOSR and INFOSTAT for a relevant year.
A limit of the capital expenditures was increased after budgetary measures by
SKK 3 000 thous. that were transferred from 2007.
The capital expenditures were spent, in particular, on reconstruction of buildings of SOSR, creation of new version of the webStat software, purchase of air-condition, emergency source of telephone exchange, computer technology and passenger motor vehicles.
Spending of non-fiscal income (in %)
An otimization of statistical surveys was one of the most important task in compliance with the strategic objective of SOSR in 2009 in order to deal complexly with issues of the comprehensive production and structural statistics in connection to production of software tools allowing to improve methods of optimization of samples, imputations, production of econometric models and better usage of administrative sources.
An implementation of the classification of economic activities SK NACE Rev. 2 into statistical surveys was one of the priority objectives of the methodological activity, and collection, evaluation and publication of data will be conducted in accordance with the revised classification.
A reflection of the national level requirements in the revised ISCO 08 that will be issued by the regulation of the European Commission in 2009 will be required in the revision of the classification of occupations.
The national classification, or adoption of its European version will be immediately released in legislative form.
So data comparability of labour market statistics will be possible at international level.
Stabilized and harmonized data and metadata of the field of statistical information system shall be provided in compliance with the standard of data and metadata exchange.
of files of data and metadata and a standard content of these files are a condition to automated production, processing and exchange of data and metadata between national and international statistical organizations.
SDMX will support an improvement of the working processes and allow transmission, dissemination and sharing data in the most effective way.
In order to achieve this objective, it is required that SDMX becomes as much as possible known and implemented.
It is not required only at the worldwide level but also at the level of the European Statistical System.
In addition to standard works on compilation of national accounts for 2008 and quarterly accounts (for the 4th quarter of 2008 and first three quarters of 2009), an effort of the macro-economic statistics will be paid to activities relating to the revision of the basic methodological handbook of the national account construction the European system of national and regional accounts (ESA95) in 2009.
Based on the findings of the EUROSTAT mission relating to the description of Sources and methods of compilation of gross national income from October 2008, an attention will be paid to the inclusion of adjustments required by EUROSTAT in the course of year.
46 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
zone since the 1st January 2009, all indicators of national accounts will be converted to euro in the complete time series and transmitted to EUROSTAT.
Price statistics will be aimed mostly at decadal monitoring of prices of selected representatives of the consumer basket in SKK and EUR over the first half of 2009 and at a calculation of index of prices of real estates and its inclusion to experimental harmonized index of consumer prices (HICP).
A key task of external trade statistics will be to transmit monthly indices of import prices of EUROSTAT and indices of export and import prices required by the Department of national accounts and also by other departments.
Another important task will be the implementation of the amended legislation relating to external trade statistics.
Statistics on trade in goods with member states will be aimed at a decrease of the response burden that can be achieved by an increase of thresholds of exemption, but the current data quality will be maintained.
In order to apply correctly the new legislation relating to external trade statistics by economic subjects, it is required to inform them about changes in the form of workshops, lectures and similar working meetings in cooperation with Customs office.
A preparation of groups in both structures of the classification of economic activities for double compilation of data files for the reference year 2008 will be realized in structural statistics, in statistics of foreign affiliations and in individual business statistics.
A priority will be producing the quality reports on evaluation of individual statistics in accordance with new regulations of the European Commission and intensifying the harmonization of business statistics with macro-economic statistics.
Another priority of 2009 will be works relating to preparation of the ad hoc survey on access of enterprises to finances.
An effort will be paid also into a construction of the tourism satellite account.
The preparation of the Farm Structural Census 2010, the implementation of the European methodology and the compilation of environment accounts and proposed regulation to pesticide statistics will be carried out.
odological and organization preparation ofthe Census of Population and Housing 2011 and realization of the next wave of survey on incomes and living conditions in households (EU SILC).
The Statistical Office will process and transmit statistical information to EUROSTAT in the field of financial and non-financial data on health and data on occupational diseases and accidents at work for 2008, will release data on average monthly wage and other labour costs including detailed information about structure and differences in remuneration.
In compliance with legislation and methodology of the European system of integrated statistics of social protection (ESSPROS), SOSR will transmit quantitative and qualitative data on social protection for 2007.
As one of the publication of the Catalogue of Publication of the Office, the publication Trends of social development in 2008 will be issued.
In 2009, an integration of relevant administrative sources into automated statistical information system and a preparation of statistical surveys of the European program of social surveys will be realized continuously.
In addition to current labour force sample survey also an additional survey on transition from school to labour life will be conducted in the 2nd quarter of 2009.
Priorities of Demographic Research Centre in 2009 will be aimed at detailed analysis of the population development and its impacts at the
level of the Slovak Republic in 2008, at methods of prognosticating input parameters for prognosis of population and also at processing of so called tables of life (death tables, health tables and marriage tables).
Election statistics will face significant tasks in 2009.
In the first quarter, in March, elections of the President of the Slovak Republic will be held and at the end of the second quarter, in June, election to the European Parliament will be held.
The Statistical Office fulfils in compliance with election acts very important tasks relating to preparation, organization and processing of results of voting in these elections.
An effort of the employees of the Office will be round off by presentation and publication of results of elections.
At the end of year, the third elections of nationwide character will be held, the elections to the bodies of municipal self-government.
SOSR will prepare processing and will process results of voting in these elections.
In addition to these elections of nationwide character, the Statistical Office realized also processing of results of new elections to the bodies of municipal self-government in dates that will be announced by the chairman of the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
SOSR will implement continuously the marketing strategy of the Office in the field of dissemination and providing statistical information.
It will develop customer-oriented statistics and Internet portal as the main implement of the statistical information dissemination.
An attention will be focused on search of new forms of electronic products.
Relating to the printed publications, it will be gradually turned away from the product as a source of statistical data
Priorities in 2009
48 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
Professional capacities of the employees and technical and technological possibilities of the Office will be largely used in this case.
In order to satisfy requirements of users of statistics as better as possible, a survey on satisfaction of users with products and services of SOSR will be conducted through a questionnaire in the course of 2009.
Results of the survey
will subsequently affect an improvement of the activities and processes in the Statistical Office of the SR.
Priorities of information technologies will be firstly aimed at an improvement the quality of services and stabilization of a personal provision of the operation of information systems and existing architecture of information and communication technologies (ICT).
Another priority will be definition of a strategy for the complex modernization and consolidation of the infrastructure of ICT.
The consolidation of
ICT will require building of completely new datacentre with an emphasis on availability, security and capacity reserve for the next period.
And last but not least our objective will be guarantee of 99,5 % availability of information technologies as an implement of the complex administration of statistical data.
Organizational structure 2008
Methodology and Information Section
Department of Comprehensive Methodology
Department of Current Accounts
Department of Accumulation Accounts
Department of External Trade Statistics
Department of Production Statistics
Department of Agricultural and Environment Statistics
Department of Market Services Statistics
Department of Projecting and Programming
Department of Information Technologies
National Accounts and Prices Section
Business Statistics Section
Department of Comprehensive Analyses and Information
Department of Strategy and Integrated Management System
President's Office
President
Department of Population Statistics
Department of Labour and Wages Statistics
Department of Social Statistics
Social Statistics and Demography Section
Regional workplace in Bratislava
Regional workplace in Trnava
Regional workplace in Trenčín
Regional workplace in Nitra
Regional workplace in Žilina
Regional workplace in Banská Bystrica
Regional workplace in Prešov
Regional workplace in Košice
Institute for Public Opinions Research
Personnel Office
Department of Office Service
Department of Economic Affairs
Vice-President
Head of Civil Service Office
Civil Service Office Secretariat
52 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2008
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Bratislava
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Trnava
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Trenčín
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Nitra
Phone: +421-37-7752 200, 37-7752 201
Information service and store of SOSR Phone: +421-2-50236 341
Mo - Tu 8.30 - 12.00 13.00 - 14.30 Wed 8.30 - 12.00 13.00 - 16.00 Th
Fr
Contacts
Institute of Informatics and Statistics
Dúbravská cesta 3
845 24 Bratislava 45
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Źilina
Phone: +421-41-5113 201, 41-5626 649
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Banská Bystrica
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Prešov
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Košice
Phone: +421-55-6410 200
Phone: +421-2-50236 768
Mo - Tu 8.00 - 12.00
Wed 8.00 - 12.00 13.00 - 15.00
Th - Fr 8.00 - 12.00
Mail room
Phone: +421-2-50236 474
Mo - Tu 8.30 - 10.30 14.30 - 15.30
Reception Phone: +421-2-50236 222
Contents
Introduction
Identification of organization
We publish periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography
Priorities in 2010
Organizational structure 2009
The year 2009 represented the next year of activities in the national statistics of the Statistical Office of the SR and was the first year of new euro currency, to transition of which the Office has already been preparing in previous years and which has began to use in presented statistics.
The last year was also the year, when the Office focused, in particular, on increasing its efficiency in order to create required conditions to meet growing requirements of interested parties in spite of limited sources.
This objective was fulfilled by implementation of the ISO 9001:2008 standard to the quality management system of the Statistical Office of the SR (hereafter called “SOSR”) realized in 2009, also the first year of implementation of the SOSR Development Strategy to 2012, an important part of the quality management system of the Office.
The implementation of the strategy paid special attention to realization of programmes, which allow regulating internal processes, knowledge basis and systems in the Office so that the statistical products and services provided to user presented an added value.
A significant measure in this connection was starting the realization of the optimization programme of interfaces between processes, development of cost management and other programmes to rationalize production cost and statistical products provision and also to decrease burden of customers by usage products and burden of respondents by providing data.
The suitability of the quality management system adjustment allowing meeting specified objectives was confirmed by the recertification audit performed by the classification society Bureau Veritas Certification in October 2009, three years after the first successful classification of the system.
SOSR was the first central body of the state administration that acquire this type of certificate.
The awarded certificate confirmed not only harmonization of the quality management system of SOSR with international standard ISO 9001:2008, but also the fact that the implemented system create appropriate conditions to develop higher efficiency of the Office and thus to improve further the quality of statistical products and services provided to customers.
SOSR paid increasing attention to rationalization of statistical surveys in order to decrease response burden in 2009.
It has begun considering the possibilities to use existing administrative sources as well as seeking possibilities to produce new sources.
4 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
The Office participated actively in initiatives leading to the development of the European statistical system.
Together with statistical offices of other member countries of the European Union, SOSR took part in the preparation of new legislative framework of the European statistics, as well as in further activities relating to the European statistical system as a whole.
In 2009, the methodology of the national statistics was strengthened by a formation of the Statistical and Mathematical Methods Department.
The mission of the department is to develop the methodology in the field of preparation, realization and processing of statistical surveys in compliance with current trends in the European and world context.
New methods of production of statistical retrievals, data processing, modelling and integration of data from different sources will be applied and the department will contribute to meet the strategic objective of the Office, i.e. increasing the quality of statistical production together with decreasing costs and administrative response burden.
The development of the national account system in compliance with new regulations and directions of the European Union was also the one of the main objective in the field of macroeconomic statistics in 2009.
Except of standard tasks that the macro-economic section met in accordance with Eurostat requirements, attention was paid to preparation of the Report on deficit and debt of public administration (notification tables) in regular dates to the 1st April and 1st October 2009.
Price statistics included in the consumer basket to calculate index of consumer prices the survey on prices in e-shops (Internet shopping) that was prepared methodically during 2009 for the first time since January 2010.
The project relating to the experimental calculation of real estates prices index and its inclusion into the calculation of harmonized index of consumer prices (HICP) was successfully finished in cooperation with Eurostat and also the Office began to send HICP with constant taxes in monthly periodicity to Eurostat.
The field of prices of production statistics published price indices in new classification SK NACE Rev.2.
The Statistical Office realized continuously the main objectives of the foreign trade statistics, such as to provide monthly indices of import prices to Eurostat and indices of export and import prices on request of national account statistics as well as on request of other departments in specified dates.
The relevant amended legislation was implemented.
Changes related also to the application programme equipment to process data from Intrastat and Extrastat.
Adjustments were realized by two grants, in which, except of solver, the External Trade Statistics Department managing methodically changes of the application programme equipment and also its testing took part.
In 2009, the centre of activities in economic statistics was focused on the response burden reduction, mostly in small enterprises and for tradesmen.
The objective was a gradual cancellation of the reporting duty of monthly surveys for tradesmen in order to replace the data collection by appropriate model estimation.
of economic crisis, new indicators expressing more accurate the short-term dynamic of changes in economy of the Slovak Republic were produced and published.
EUROSTAT received relevant information from science and technique statistics and from information society statistics to be able to evaluate objectives of the Lisbon Strategy.
Social statistics and demography continued with the preparation of Census of Population and Housing 2011 (CPH 2011) in compliance with the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council as well as in compliance with implementing regulations so that the census will provide data on the Slovak Republic harmonized with the European requirements.
The year 2009 was also the year of methodological and organizational preparation of data collection on low-income households in order to construct living wages.
Activities were realized in cooperation with the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR.
In the course of 2009, the Office performed processing of results of the SR presidential election, the elections to the European Parliament and to the bodies of regional self-governments of the SR concerning the election statistics.
All information was available continuously at the Office's website.
The conception of the statistical information dissemination was prepared in accord with the direction of Community Statistical Programme 2008 - 2012 at SOSR in 2009.
Principles and forms of the statistical information dissemination resulted to significant changes that strengthened the Internet solving as a dominant and free of charge accessibility of information to users, to dissemination of the content of on-line databases and to development of the user-comfort application tools to statistical information dissemination.
The survey on satisfaction of users with products and services of SOSR was realized via on-line questionnaire over the course of 2009 to consider as better as possible the satisfaction of statistical requirements of customers.
Results of surveys affected the production of prod
ucts and dissemination forms and they will be gradually reflected in the improvement of activities and processes in the whole SOSR.
The year 2009 was also evaluated very significantly by SOSR in the field of informatics.
The complex renewal of information and communication technologies was realized, i.e. at the level of working stations as well as at the level of central components by building of new computer centre equipped by modern technologies.
The approval of the national project on Electronic services of SOSR created conditions to realize purposes of the conception of information system development of the SOSR, objective of which is to build up an integrated statistical information system (further only “ISIS”).
Similarly as in the previous years also in 2009, the Office was actively involved in international activities.
Representatives of SOSR actively took part in the preparation and approval of the European statistical legislation in meetings of working groups of the European Commission and of the Council.
The Office was visited by many significant persons, such as the Prime minister of the Czech Republic Jan Fisher, the General Director of Eurostat Walter Rademacher, or presidents of statistical offices of neighbouring countries.
Acronym:
Address of headquarter: Miletičova 3, 824 67 Bratislava 26, Slovak Republic Contact:
Management:
Identification of organization
Main activities:
8 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
In the last year, the development of the quality management system focused on increasing its efficiency in order to create gradually required conditions to meet permanently more demanding requirements and expectations of customers in the environment of strongly limited sources.
The implementation of the standard ISO 9001:2008 into the quality management system of SOSR being realized in 2009 supported meeting this objective.
This standard replacing originally introduced ISO 9001:2000 stressed better aspects leading to higher efficiency.
Changes caused by the new standard were reflected in documented procedures of individual processes and in further documentation of the quality management system of SOSR.
The first year of the implementation of Development Strategy of the SO SR to 2012 as an important part of the quality management system contributed significantly to meet the defined objective.
The significant step in this connection was the realization of the optimization programme of interfaces between processes, development of costs management and further programmes leading to rationalization of production costs and statistical products provision and also decreasing the burden of customers relating to data usage and burden of respondents relating to data providing.
The implementation of programmes used successfully experiences of the partnership national statistical offices.
The implementation of programmes was supported by corporate culture developed for purposes of common recognized values of SOSR, i.e. mostly those, which praise a personal responsibility of employees to achieve results of the institution under optimally expended costs.
The level of the quality management system was again examined by the internal audits performed in all processes of SOSR.
The comprehensive evaluation of the system was recorded in the fourth Report on evaluation of the quality management system of SOSR.
The recertification supervisory audit performed by the classification society Bureau Veritas Certification confirmed also the harmonization of the implemented quality management system with the requirements of the ISO 9001:2008 in October 2009, three years after the first successful certification of the system.
SOSR was the first central body of the state administration that acquired this type of certificate.
The awarded certificate confirmed that SOSR meets requirements of the international standard ISO 9001:2008 in regard to organization, acquiring, processing and providing of the official statistics in compliance with the valid standards.
We increase the efficiency of the integrated management system
10 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
The long-term objective of statistical surveys is to provide only surveys that are important and required in societal terms, are performed economically, without duplicity, with efficient usage of administrative sources and are acquired at qualitative and comparable level.
One of the steps towards meet this objective in 2009 was a formation of the new Statistical and Mathematical Methods Department, mission of which is to develop methodology of preparation, realization and processing of statistical surveys.
Activities of the department are concentrated mostly on the following areas: \ minimizing the response burden and increasing the precision of surveys by improving the methodology of population production in reporting units and optimizing the range and structure of statistical retrievals, \ increasing the quality of populations of statistical data and final statistical outputs by development of methodology of statistical processing, mostly verifications and amendments of input data, estimations of values to non-delivered data (imputations) and calculations of population values of indicators and \ systematic evaluations of qualitative parameters of all process phases of statistical surveys and also processing the quality of statistical products provided to customers.
One of the main tools to increase the quality of statistical production under the current decrease of costs and response burden is usage of existing data sources produced generally for administrative purposes.
Their direct usage for purposes of production of statistics is not possible because they require
application of many controls and calculations or to aggregate data from different sources.
Mathematical and statistical methods have a significant task also in this respect.
Hard work in the statistical reporting system optimization leaded also to the reduction of a range and duplicity of acquired statistical information in 2009.
The harmonization of national statistics continued in the European statistical system by the adoption of legal acts of the European Community and the European Union.
SOSR on the base of these facts issued changes and amendments of the Programme of State Statistical Surveys 2009-2011.
The reduction of a range and duplicity of acquired statistical information can be demonstrated on the following examples.
Effort to harmonize data acquisition relating to the development and structure of the employment and wages by districts of the Slovak Republic resulted in cancelling the survey Annual report on labour (Práca 3 - 01).
SOSR will receive data on development and structure of the employment and wages by districts of the Slovak Republic under the agreement with the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family
of the SR from the national statistical survey conducted by the Ministry.
In case of data on administration, operation and maintenance of ducts and sewerages, duplicated addressing of the same circle of reporting units was eliminated.
The survey Annual report of operators of ducts and sewerages (Vod 1-01) was dissolved and the data sources will be administrative data that are under administration of the Ministry of Environment of the SR.
The other significant example of the reporting system optimization is changing the periodicity of selected modules of reports containing financial indicators in quarterly production statistics and in annual structural surveys.
The decrease of costs by enterprises caused by the duty to provide statistical information is an ambition of the national and European statistical system.
The long-term problem is responding of small and middle enterprises tolerating higher burden compared to other enterprises, while they have often no access to high technologies or have not specialized employees to perform all duties.
They have to turn the attention to relevant providers of services and it increases their costs.
This fact was recorded by the Commission of the European Community analyzing the administrative burden as a whole, not excepting statistics.
Similarly since 2010, the exclusion of the entrepreneurs from specifica
tion of reporting units is planned in monthly statistical surveys in the sectors of transport, information and communication and selected market services.
In these activities the significant objective is the application of developed mathematical and statistical methods of production of statistical retrievals, data processing, modelling and integration of data from different sources.
Activities realized during 2009 were focused on the development of the statistical classification and codes and on the harmonization with European and international standards.
12 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
The Annex of the decree is supplemented by a converter to international level of education according to the international classification of education ISCED 1997.
In 2009, the methodological assistance was continuously provided to the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR in order to apply the classification of occupations within the project of Integrated System of Type Positions and to the Ministry of Finance of the SR in order to coordinate application of the economic classifications SK NACE Rev.2. and CPA 2008 for tax purposes.
Under the classification CPA 2008, the business subject included tangible and intangible property and construction for purposes to define depreciative group.
the Eurogroup Register of enterprises (EGR) were solved in cooperation with Eurostat.
In the EGR project, responsible body for which is Eurostat, the first cycle of exchange of information on the supranational groups of enterprises and the legal units belonging to these groups was realized.
The cooperation result is establishment of the starting basis of the Eurogroup Register of enterprises, administrator of which is Eurostat.
At the end of 2009, testing the exchange of data via the exchange format SDMX was started.
The electronic system of the register ASIS REGIS administration extended its functionality by the calculation of the main activity of business subjects on the base of statistical data classified by CPA 2008 and by functions of collective updating of the register from statistical and administrative sources for purposes to increase the quality of key parameters of statistical register in 2009.
In June 2009, the harmonized data collection on demography of enterprises under the common methodology of Eurostat and OECD was completed.
The methodology of data imputation on the number of employees in small enterprises based on administrative data provided for this purpose by Datacentre was repeatedly applied to calculate indicators.
The development of the national account system harmonized with the new regulations and directions of the European Union was one of the main objectives of the macro-economic statistics also in 2009.
In last year, the final annual sector accounts for 2006, preliminary ones for 2007 and estimation of 2008 based on new and adjusted data were compiled.
SOSR conducted some improvements in the whole time series relating to the implementation of rules of the national account system.
These improvements relates to re-classification of the private health insurance companies from the institutional sector of the public administration to the sector of financial corporations, to recording of payments for registration of motor vehicles and payments for disposal.
Office followed from the second visit and it is required to pay them appropriate attention in 2010 in order that Eurostat accept our method of the compilation of national accounts.
The final commodity and sector supply/use tables for 2006 were compiled.
Adjustments resulting from the reclassification of private health insurance companies were reflected in time series for 1995 - 2006 in compliance with the annual national accounts.
Based on the revised balanced tables of supply/use for 2000 - 2005 and the revised quarterly sector structures for the 1st quarter of 1995 and for the 2nd quarter of 2009, the time series of indicators of the production and income method to constant prices of the previous year were back-casted and recalculation was realized by chain procedure of volume indices to reference year 2000.
In 2009, SOSR calculated the compensation for small companies exempted from VAT for purposes of own sources flowing from VAT relied on the methodology prepared by Eurostat and in compliance with the requirement of the Ministry of Finance of the SR.
Within 45 days once the reference quarter ended, flash estimation of the GDP, the main aggregates and the employment was provided regularly.
Quarterly data were compiled fully in compliance with the transmission programme ESA 95 and regularly released within 65 days once the reference quarter ended.
Data of quarterly accounts are seasonally adjusted in accordance with regulations and directions of the European Union.
14 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
duction of data by 25 member states (GP 01-08) were realized with the increasing effort.
All activities required by Eurostat were realized at the section of preparation of documents to compilation of the purchasing power parity.
The most significant can be mentioned: calculation of weights of GDP (volumes and prices) for the purchasing power parity (PPP), price survey of selected comparable goods, services, construction projects and investment units, survey on wages in state administration and survey of prices of rental.
The survey on prices in e-shops was included in the consumer basket to the calculation of index of consumer prices in price statistics for the first time since 2010.
The main activity of the external trade statistics, i.e. the delivery of monthly indices of import prices to Eurostat and indices of export and import prices for requests of national accounts as well as for requests of other departments was fulfilled.
Specified deadlines were kept.
The amended legislation was implemented.
Changes also related to the application programme equipment to process data from Intrastat and Extrastat.
Two grants dealt with adjustments, except of solver the External Trade Department of SOSR, which methodically managed adjustments of the application programme equipment and their subsequent testing after implementation, took part in them.
Increases of year-on-year development of GDP in %
GDP - current prices GDP - constant prices calculated by chain
Note: CPLY - corresponding period last year
The centre of activities in business short-term statistics was aimed at the recalculation of time series of short-term indicators in the structure of classification SK NACE Rev. 2. in order to deliver the first data files in new structure to Eurostat on time.
Keeping deadlines of the first transmission was one of the priorities of Eurostat and the European Central Bank in relation to the continuing economic crisis.
SOSR maintained all requirements in relation to the implementation of SK NACE Rev.2.
The comprehensive evaluation of the compatibility with the regulation on shortterm statistics showed SOSR was included in the first category of the member countries with the best level of compatibility.
The special questionnaire on the complicated indicator of turnover for selected market services in the quality action plan of the short-term statistics was prepared and transmitted.
SOSR also took part in the comprehensive evaluation of the quality of short-term statistics (Rolling review), which included evaluations of users, producers of national statistical data and selfevaluation in Eurostat.
The annual structural statistics compiled files of the final indicators for 2007 and files of preliminary data for 2008 and transmitted them on time.
Also in this area, SOSR was included in the first category of the member states with the best level of compatibility with the regulation on structural statistics.
SOSR joined testing the ability to complete the structured quality reports of the structural statistics data relating to the preparation of a new concept of the quality evaluation.
Data files of foreign affiliates for 2007 were compiled and delivered according to the new regulation on statistics of foreign affiliates for the first time.
The weekly professional consultation at SOSR was prepared to experts from Tajikistan in the twining cooperation project and was connected with the visit of the workplace in Banská Bystrica.
Experts were acquainted with the whole process of collection, processing and publishing results of industrial statistical surveys with the emphasis on the method of calculation of industrial production index.
In business statistics, activities were focused on further increase of harmonization with the European legislation, intput and output quality of the statistical system and data availability rate in databases of Eurostat and SOSR.
International activities were aimed at the realization of project activities in cooperation with Eurostat and the European Commission and related to the implementation of new regulations and to the harmonization of classifications and codes.
16 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
During the year, recalculations of time series were prepared by SK NACE Rev.2. in more detailed structures and the data basis published at the portal and in databases of SOSR was gradually extended.
Great attention was paid to preparing the input methodology and to increasing the quality of information system outputs.
In order to improve the communication with key customers, a working meeting with journalists of the periodical TREND relating to processing and results of annual surveys for the sector of industrial and construction statistics was realized.
Additionally to the regular monthly delivery of required indicators of sectors of industry, construction, retail trade, services and investment in industry, the centre of activities in business surveys was focused on the preparation of documents and formation of conditions for implementation of SK NACE Rev.2. to new processing and retrospective back-casting time series in accordance with requirements of the grant activity.
Improving the data basis quality in order to calculate confidence indicators in individual sectors and to produce the synthetic composite indicator, economic sentiment indicator (ESI) continued with in
Construction output
Employed persons
Average monthly wage
dividual consultations with respondents.
Possibilities to use the processed results of data from business surveys in industry predicting the industrial production development in the SR conditions were presented at the workshop of the European Commission in Brussels in October.
The statistics of science, technique and innovations paid attention to strengthening the survey by the second level of code of science fields, in which research and development works are mostly realized.
Quality reports on surveys were prepared for individual sectors of research and development and data were delivered to international institutions in regular and monothematic questionnaires.
The survey on innovations including pilot indicators on environmental innovations was realized according to the revised methodology of Oslo.
In 2009, a good cooperation with international organizations continued.
Many consultations relating to the business statistics were realized concerning the bilateral contacts with the Czech Republic.
The Statistical Office of the SR received for a half yearly stay an employee of the Turkey Statistical Office and provided the expert consultation in Montenegro in statistics of science, technique and innovations.
The expert consultation was provided also to external delegation from Tajikistan in industrial statistics.
Development tasks aimed at the evaluation of the statistical data quality, updating balance tools and software products, the optimization of sample production, as well as at usage of
Structure of expenditures on research and development by financial resources in 2008
business resources state and public resources resources of universities and private non-profit org. external resources
18 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
model possibilities and mathematical and statistical methods in a revision of time series of the short-term indicators were performed in cooperation with research sphere in business statistics.
Three professional workshops were held in cooperation with INFOSTAT relating to the methodological development of time series; they were focused on a usage presentation of statistical data acquired by processing in order to estimate macro-economic quantities and indicators, on predicting the next development and on signalizing turning points in economic cycles (Evaluation of quality of statistical data - 2nd phase, Construction of leading indicator - signals of turning points - 2nd phase, Usage of quantitative and qualitative information on compilation of flash estimations of macro-economic indicators in conditions of the SR ).
Significant attention in statistics of transport, posts and telecommunications and also in statistics of information and communications
was paid to recalculation of time series 2000 - 2008 for selected indicators by SK NACE Rev.2, in compliance with the regulation of the European Union relating to short-term business statistics.
Mostly in the newly established sector, information and communications including different parts of SK NACE Rev.2, it was required to apply conversion coefficients in order to calculate time series.
The statistical regulations of the European Union concerning the transport and data delivery to databases of Eurostat as well as to common questionnaires of international organizations were implemented to all sectors of transport relevant for the Slovak Republic.
The revision of the Slovak language of the third version of International notes of international organizations was realized.
The Office joined the grant cooperation with Eurostat in road transport.
The cooperation with international organizations continued with the participation in
Transport of goods in thous. tons
Railway transport
Road transport
working meetings organized by Eurostat.
Based on requirements of Eurostat, a new group of activities for services, or their aggregates including data adjusted by working days in quarterly periodicity delivered to the European database was created.
Historical data back-casted by the new classification relating to new group of activities, or their aggregates were also sent.
Tourism statistics continued with analytical works in accommodation statistics and in data collection for domestic tourism.
Data required by Eurostat in compliance with the regulation No 57/1995 are delivered in monthly, or in quar
terly periodicity and are published by Eurostat in the publication Data in Focus.
Information required for the development and improvement of statistical methods in tourism and production of TSA was obtained by the participation in two international projects.
Currently, selected tables on 2007 are available.
Agricultural statistics and environment statistics was focused on improving the quality of compilation of environment accounts and business accounts to agriculture at the level of NUTS 2.
The main activities were aimed at profiling data sources, which are not available in SOSR.
The Office participated in the revision of the integrated system of environment and economic accounts (SEEA) within the international cooperation.
Transport of passengers in thous.
Railway transport
Road transport
City transport
20 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
Activities of social statistics and demographic statistics were affected mostly by the increase of public interest in social and demographic development, in its influence on consequences for society and perspectives to future.
The main priorities were acquisition of quality internationally comparable statistical data on social situation and demographic development of population and increasing the publication of information on social situation of households.
Attention was paid also on calculation of internationally comparable indicators of social inclusion and data on employment.
Demographic indicators were processed up to the level of municipalities in order to support the regional development.
The access to standardly issued publications was simplified and the number of publications provided free of charge increased.
Importance of social and demographic development was strengthened by different forms of media activities (press conferences, interviews) and also professional public activities (Demographic colloquium) at the side of the national statistics as a tool to supporting decisions.
Attention was paid to dissemination of statistical data on social protection via form of publications and lectures.
Social statistics and Demografic Research Centre
Information about the population development was provided to users; possibilities of data acquiring from administrative sources were verified.
To ensure CPH 2011, activities relating to the territorial preparation of this significant statistical action were realized.
The harmonization of the survey content with international recommendations and requirements continued and conditions for its realizations were created.
The preparation of the survey of income and expenditures of private households continued in statistics of household account.
The next wave of the survey on incomes and living conditions of households (EU SILC 2009) was realized.
The survey is fully harmonized with the European Union requirements; it allows international comparison of the social situation of households in the SR.
The survey on 2009 was conducted; the survey on 2010 has been prepared methodically and organizationally.
Labour and wage statistics introduced the new classification SK NACE Rev.2 in the system of quarterly statistical information on labour market.
* number of persons 65 years old and over per 100 children 0 - 14 years old
22 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
Structure of the SR population by family status and by age, 2008
Women
Men
attention was paid to a smooth transition to reporting financial indicators and remuneration for labour in new currency Euro.
The labour force sample survey was extended by the additional school-to-work transition survey in the 2nd quarter.
Moreover SOSR contributed to production of an additional survey that is preparing on 2011by testing the
questionnaire design and by the collection of selected indicators on employment of persons with long-term health problems.
In the continuing process of the statistical reporting system optimization, preparatory works on the unification of the annual survey on labour conducted by SOSR with ministerial information system on labour price of the
85 a viac
widowed divorced married single
single married divorced widowed
age
Characteristics of development of population number in the SR, 1950 - 2008
number of population (thous.)
Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR started.
In 2009, data on facilities of social services, on disability to work for disease or accident, on non-profit associations, on social insurance company and health insurance companies were produced to domestic users based on the quarterly or annual data collection
Social statistics and Demografic Research Centre
24 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
within statistical surveys and from administrative sources.
Surveys on non-market services were extended by surveys in budgetary and allowance organizations and by surveys on small municipalities in compliance with three-year periodicity of the collection.
The selected statistical information was published in supplemented range also in publicly available database of SLOVSTAT including data on financial flows in health and education.
Activities were focused also on preparing the implementation of the European victimization survey and European module on disability and social integration in the form of pilot projects aimed at translation and testing of methodologies and questionnaires.
In this group of activities, the Office joined the project EUMIDA aimed at production of database on European universities.
The third area of the cooperation was data production in statistics of social protection by the methodology of ESSPROS, data on financial flows in health by the methodology of the health account system and the production of data on accidents at work and occupational diseases by the methodologies ESAW and EODS.
Demographic Research Centre (DRC) dealt with 4 planned tasks assigned by SOSR in 2009.
The result of these activities was 2 publications issued directly in INFOSTAT: (Population development in the SR 2008 and Methodologies of prognostication of input parameters for prognosis of population), documents for publication issued by SOSR Population movement of the SR 2008 and documents to publish the life tables.
DRC developed the cooperation with domestic and non-domestic demographic institutions; employees took part in many projects, prepared presentations on professional conferences and articles to professional periodicals.
Comprehensive information on DRC activities is available at the website www.infostat. sk/vdc and is a subject of a press conference at SOSR.
In 2009, SOSR realized three main tasks at the election statistics department.
The first task was processing of results of the SR presidential election.
It created expert (summarizing) units to all district election commission and to the Central Election Commission.
These units summa
rized results of voting by computer technique and prepared proposals of records with results of voting to relevant election commissions.
The SR presidential election was held in two rounds, similarly as in the previous two elections.
SOSR released the election result at its website and issued also the publication and CD with the election result.
Population of the Slovak Republic elected its representatives to the European Parliament the 6th June 2009.
SOSR provided the register of candidates in electronic form to prepare processing of results and cooperated with the Central Election Commission in order to con
Share of votes for candidates in 2nd round of the presidential election in the SR
Mandates assigned to political parties in election to EP 2009
26 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
Participation in elections to Higher Territorial Units (in %)
1st round
2nd round
trol candidate documents.
It issued the methodology relating to processing results of voting in elections and prepared the project of automated processing of results of elections.
The third significant task was preparation of processing and processing of results of the elections to the bodies of regional self-government at the election statistics department.
SOSR issued the methodology and prepared the project of automated processing of results of elections in compliance with organizational and technical provision of the elections.
Before the elections representations of regional selfgovernment specified the election districts, in which deputies were elected.
The number of election districts, to which SOSR created expert (summarizing) departments increased to 90.
The president of the municipal self-government was elected in the 1st round of the elections in four districts.
The 2nd round of the elections was realized in four districts.
The results of the 2nd round were also processed by expert (summarizing) units working in election districts of relevant districts.
SOSR released results of elections (in paper and also in electronic form) and also published them at its website.
The elections were declared in 16 municipalities that came under 11 district election commissions.
SO SR set up an expert (summarizing) unit to each district election commission and also to the Central Election Commission that processed results of the elections at its level.
Results of elections were released in printing form and at the website of SOSR.
Workplaces of SOSR in regions contributed largely to fulfilled all tasks at the election statistics department.
The Institute of Informatics and Statistics (INFOSTAT) as research and development work station in national statistics participates in activities of SOSR yearly.
The cooperation between the INFOSTAT and SOSR is based on the contract concluded by both organizations for a relevant year.
The content of the contract reflects priority statistical activities of the Office.
In 2009 INFOSTAT dealt with 22 main tasks divided to 62 partial outputs.
There were following areas in terms of specification:
\ development and innovation - of subsystems of METIS, REGIS relating to the automated statistical information system (ASIS); software to business surveys, balancing of energy, farm register, updating of inputs and outputs from sample survey in road freight transport (RFT), calculation of indicators of foreign affiliates statistics (FATS);
Urban and municipal statistics (UMS) and Urban Information System (UIS);
\ methodological solutions - of consolidated indicators of production data for selected domains; compilation of leading indicator; tourism satellite account; accounts in social statistics; flash estimations of GDP and employment; analyses and modelling of time series; prognostication of input parameters for prognosis of population; sample surveys of population; accounts in social statistics (health accounts, accounts of education);
\ analyses - of standardization of data and metadata to exchange data of the statistical information system (SIS); content linking of sample surveys of population; possibilities of construction of the satellite account of science and technique in condition of the Slovak Republic;
\ forecast - of the short-term development of the economy in the SR.
The activity of INFOSTAT for 2009 is completely documented in a special report available at the Office's website www.statistics.sk, in part About us/Key documents/Annual Reports.
28 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
Customer services continued realizing action programmes to meet strategic objectives.
Based on Marketing Plan of SOSR for 2009, many activities were performed in order to meet requirements and expectations of customers in the largest measure.
A great number of processed files of data, questionnaires and tables in different periodicity were provided to significant domestic and non-domestic customers during the year.
123 data files, which they used for management and decision
Marketing activities were aimed at understanding of customers and increasing their knowledge.
During the last year, different statistical information were provided via information service.
Together 3 406 requests for information were met (by 3,6 % more than in 2008), of which 2 834 were domestic and 572 nondomestic.
The most requests were registered from students, further from the business sector, international organizations, but also from general public.
This data do not include a great number of the requests for information met by phone or by personal visit.
Information was provided standardly by retrieval from database or publications, but also on the base of individual processing.
The highest interest was in information about demography and labour market.
Conditions for establishment of an electronic catalogue of products, which provided unified and comfort access of all issued publications to customers were created.
10 095 registered users visited the public database in total and 287 881data extractions were realized from 755 tables.
The number of extractions in
Requirements by groups of customers in 2009
International and external institution 19,5 %
Media 1,7 %
Financial situation 1,2 %
State administration, self-government 8,0 %
Business subject, companies 24,0 %
Science and research 1,9 %
Students and teachers 24,1 %
Public service institutions 4,5 %
Broad public 15,1 %
30 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
creased twofold in comparison with the previous year.
Users were interested mostly in indicators from labour market, prices and quarterly national accounts from statistical topics.
The most extractions were made by users from business sector (more than one half) and students (almost one quarter).
Demography 36,2 %
Labour market 22,9 %
Organization statistics 4,6 %
Territory, climate 5,4 %
Statistics relating to many areas 3,7 %
Social statistics 9,0 %
Macro-economic statistics 4,0 %
Banking and finances 1,5 %
were evaluated, response rate was 47,1 %.
More than a half of respondents were students and representatives of enterprises and entrepreneurs.
Respondents assessed 36 items in five areas.
They have a possibility to express their satisfaction, or dissatisfaction e.g. with concrete products, level of services, with databases, availability and timeliness of information required, understandability of methodological notes, level of website as well as products of statistical domains.
The level of services providing by the employees of the Office can be considered as the strongest feature of SOSR.
Respondents assessed as the highest level of the satisfaction helpfulness and willingness (85,8 points), professionalism of employees, promptness of
Satisfaction rate with the quality of SOSR services (in points)
state administration, self-government, public service institutions
international organizations
financial and bank institions
enterprises, businessmen
media
students
broad public
Average satisfaction rate of respondents (in points)
average satisfaction rate of categories of respondents
total average satisfaction rate
professional qualification of employees
completness of services
quickness of meeting requirement
helpfulness and willigness of employees
average satisfaction rate per one service
average satisfaction rate with the quality of services
be reflected in improving activities and processes in the Office.
Statistical publications were issued continuously in compliance with the Catalogue of Publications 2009 at the headquarter and at workplaces of SOSR in regions in monthly, quarterly and annual periodicity.
and telecommunications, quarterly Statistical Report on Basic Development Tendencies in the SR (which is submitted to the Government of the SR), Trends of social development in the SR 2009, Slovak Republic in figures 2009.
Additionally to the plan these publications were issued for example Social protection in the SR in years 1995 - 2006 and Slovakia in EU - National Accounts.
Workpaces of SOSR in regions issued together 84 titles.
In additon to the Catalogue of Publications, publications on election to the bodies of reginal self-government, propagation publications and titles from demography and social statistics were released.
In accord with the Strategy of SOSR to 2012 in production of products and with policy of dissemination of Eurostat, the publication activity conception on the next period was adopted over the course of 2009.
The publication activity of SOSR in regions was also unified, it was reflected in the Catalogue of Publications 2010.
Current trend in dissemination of statistical information required largely and by the latest tools and methods to conceive the statistical data in order to help easier understanding and quick orientation.
SOSR prepared reccomendations for the compilation and adjustment of statistical tables, graphes and maps for its partners in the national statistical system (NSS) in order to produce input products including also statistical data.
The Office continued with the grant project of Eurostat European Statistical Data Support (ESDS) relating to customer services.
Information on the European statistics released in the part European Statistics - ESDS at the SOSR's website was updated continuously in order to provide users the access to the most updated information and pulbications.
In 2009, the presentations about dissemination and use of the European statistics were realized for student and academic community of the Comenius University in Bratislava.
34 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
The issue of the scientific periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography continued with 19th year in 2009.
The periodical presents scientific articles and information articles in chapters, professional articles from statistics and demography in discussions and opinions submitted by employees of SOSR, professionals from universities and faculties of the whole Slovakia, scientific workplaces and other institutions.
Authors from the Czech Republic also contributed to the periodical.
Also analytical studies, overviews and professional opinions of individual authors are presented in the periodical.
In 2009, some historical studies from demography were released in the periodical.
The redaction council was leaded by Mr. Milan Olexa during the whole year 2009.
At the end of 2009, he introduced by the occasion of his going to retirement new president to the members of the council Mrs. Ľudmila Ivančíková, who was appointed to this post by the President of SOSR.
SOSR was very active concerning the international cooperation in the last year.
In this field, its activity was focused mostly on activities relating to the European Statistical system.
Professionals of SOSR took part in meeting of working groups of the European Commission and of the Council, and so they actively participated in preparation of legislative proposals and adoption of legal acts of the European Union aimed at introduction of new statistical methods, increase the quality and comparability of data at the European level.
In 2009, 25 new statistical legal acts of the European Union came into force, of which 8 regulations of the European Parliament and of the Council.
The other legal acts related to agricultural statistics, environment statistics, trade within the Community, external trade with third countries, information society and statistical
data collection of the European Central Bank.
17 regulations of the European Commission had implementing form.
Additionally to activities relating to the European statistical system, the Office cooperated also with other international organizations and institutions, such as Statistical Commission of the UN, Conference on European Statisticians at the UN ECE, the OECD Committee on Statistics, International Labour Organizations (ILO), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), World Trade Organization (WTO) and its representatives actively participated in statistical events organized by these international organizations.
The Office visited many delegations of external and international statistical institutions in order to intensify bilateral international cooperation.
36 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
The Office also organized successfully other international events, such as the international conference to cross-border cooperation in Bardejov, the scientific colloquium to statistics on incomes and living conditions of households (EU SILC) or the mission to the description of sources and methods of the compilation of gross national income (GNI Inventory).
year, it took part in the project implementation, aim of which is to strengthen the national statistical system of Tajikistan.
In 2009, experts realized 4 working missions to Tajikistan and Tajikistan statisticians visited SOSR for purposes of study visit aimed at industrial statistics.
The Office provided consultations as well as for representatives of Azerbaijan Statistical Office.
A half-year professional fellowship dealing with activities relating to science and technique statistics was attended by the employee of the Turkish Statistical Office at the Office.
SOSR employees took part in 232 external business trips in this year, i.e. 309 individual commencements.
The most trips were realized to Luxembourg to meetings of working groups and committees of Eurostat.
The aim of other external business trips was the participation in meetings of working group STATIS at the Council of the European Union, active presentations at international confer
Employees of the Office dealt with 29 grant projects funded by the European Union, which contributed to the implementation of new European regulations and development of the Slovak statistics in the last year.
External business trips by purpose
Eurostat - EC 62 %
Others 12 %
Council 2 %
Technical assistance 8 %
Projects 2 %
Bilateral 8 %
38 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
Employees are the highest treasure of the Statistical Office.
Quality personal work and attention to human resources is therefore a significant priority of the activity not only of the whole Personnel Office but also of the all head employees.
SOSR make all to satisfy working and social needs of its employees, to allow their professional growth within its financial and material possibilities.
In 2009, 998,8 employees (the average registered recalculated number), of which 346 employees at the headquarter and 652,8 employees at the workplaces of SOSR in regions.
Education and age structure of employees of the Office to the 31 December 2009 are depicted in the following graphs.
78,4 % women and 21,6 % men were employed at the Office.
From the total number of 136 heads, 69 % represented women and 31 % represented men.
The Statistical Office approaches the recruitment of qualified and productive employees professionally.
In 2009, the Personnel Office realized 41 public competitions to occupy vacant civil servant posts.
The success of the Office in this area is the price Recruit Rank Awards 2009 awarded by the company Profesia for the best evaluated public competitions at Slovakia based on evaluations of applicant for a job.
SOSR acquired the second place in the category Companies.
97 % of posts were occupied to the 31 December 2009.
The realization of professional education activities included in the Education Plan of Employees for 2009 was a base of the education of SOSR employees.
Planned events were supplemented by workshops that resulting from current requests of the departments and employees during the year.
The education was aimed at increasing the knowledge in relevant issues, language preparation, skills in usage
Education structure of employees
primary 0,7 %
tertiary I. level 2,4 %
full secondary with A levels 46,7 %
secondary without A levels 2,9 %
tertiary II. level 47,3 %
of information and communication technologies, personality development, communication with customers and managerial preparation.
The circle of the prepared education events provided an occasion for the development of employees from all target groups.
In other education of managers, the Personnel Office repeatedly organized highly evaluated training Effective manager by attendants.
Based on requirements of the Development Strategy of SOSR to 2012, new training focused on the personality development and the communication skills were prepared and realized, such as Couching, Presentation and public performance and Training of effective communication with customers.
A significant area of the education was increasing knowledge and skills of employees - specialists in the field of statistics.
This group of
employees have the possibility to choice from the offer of education activities at national or international level.
The Personnel Office continued realizing the professional education programme Schola Statistica in cooperation with external lectors.
With the exception of trainings aimed at different statistical specializations, a part of the programme was also trainings to target group of new employees of the Office.
These trainings were an occasion to obtain basic statistical information and to exercise basic mathematical and statistical methods used by the processing of statistical data.
The trainings of Schola Statistica were realized in the education centre of SOSR in Klatova Nová Ves or in classrooms of Infostat.
118 employees in total took part in these professional trainings.
122 employees took part in workshops and trainings at international level.
The highest interest was in professional statistical train
Age structure of employees
under 30 years 8,7 %
31 - 40 years 15,8 %
41 - 50 years 29,8 %
51 - 60 years 37,5 %
nad 60 years 8,2 %
40 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
ings organized in individual countries of the European Union concerning the European Statistical Training Programme.
The increasing interest of employees to improve their communication in foreign languages was presented by the high participation in half-intensive or intensive courses of the English and French language.
339 employees from the whole office took part in the education relating to the language preparation in the last year.
The information technologies realized trainings to work with applications in order to support publication and presentation of statistical information, with information personal system and with office package of Microsoft Office 2007.
In this field of the education, 1 140 employees took part in total.
In 2009, 2 960 participants were educated in 338 education activities.
The total costs spent on the education of employees of the Office amounted to EUR 81 742.
Library of SOSR is a significant source of information to employees of the Office and its external customers.
The main activity of the li
brary is aimed at supplementing, registration and providing of library fund, to which 1 576 new publications were added and 87 titles of daily press and periodicals.
It represents the amount of EUR 19 957 in financial statement.
5 377 borrowings were registered in the library to 3 146 readers, of which interested persons from external environment prevailed largely.
The Statistical Office also considers as an integral part of the human resources the survey on satisfaction of its employees.
Therefore it realizes continually the corporate culture survey and satisfaction of employees in cooperation with the Centre of social researches at Infostat in compliance with strategic activities of its development.
The survey results help to discover the internal environment of the Office, the identification rate of employees with individual elements of the corporate culture and provide possibilities to improve the working climate supporting objectives and the vision of the Office.
The survey shows a positive trend in the development of the Office's corporate culture, i.e. in the field of professional self-confidence of employees, appreciation of possibilities of the professional growth, working climate in departments, team cooperation and solidarity.
The aim of each organization is increasing the quality and availability of services together with effective spending of financial, human and technological sources required for the development and maintenance of the operation of the total technological infrastructure.
Currently, the effective functioning of each organization is inseparably connected with information technologies (IT) with many key and supporting functions in order to provide and realize services inside the organization, but also outside the organization towards external partners, users or suppliers.
IT play an important role to the functioning of the organization itself and both elements are largely mutually linked, when the quality and availability of services is fully connected with effective fulfilling the IT functions.
It is required high level of an interdependence and dependence of the organization relating to the IT functioning in practice.
A lapse of key elements of IT in the organization has a direct impact on the quality and availability of services and can even paralyse the functioning of the organization as a whole or its critical parts connected with provision of services.
The year 2009 was the year of increasing the quality and availability of information and
Information sources and information and communication technologies
technological services in the IT of SOSR.
In order to achieve this goal, it was necessary to solve procedural changes within IT and to define clear interfaces and rules.
The most important change occurred in communication with the internal customer that is a leading customer of information and technological services.
The central model of ordering and registration of the client requests via helpdesk, in which categories of services, responsible IT specialists and evaluation criterion of quality of performed work were clearly defined, was created.
This change brought an added value in registration of requests, shortening of reactive time on requests and last but not least in measuring and improving the quality of provided services.
It created also conditions for the planned introduction of ITSM (IT Service Management) in environment of SOSR in 2010.
In 2009, the Office has to deal with the availability of services and related components of information and communication technologies (ICT).
The man
42 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
Life cycle of the internal customer request
Registration of request through IT Hotline to MagicDesk
Specification of request
Sending request
(Solver/ department of solvers is known?)
(NO)
assigning request to solver by HelpDesk operator
(YES)
Customer request realization
Accepting request by solver
(Customer request is realizing?)
Request/problem solved
(Customer is satisfied with solution)
(YES) Finalizing request
In case of request for system delivered and supported by external customer, registration of request to the ECHO system
Description of request: - type, category and classification of request - priority - detailed description of a problem
Sending notification email after: - accepting request - changing the process of request - solving request/problem
Urging request by HelpDesk operator
Archiving information about request
Customer writing a request
agement of SOSR agreed the strategic plan to modernize and consolidate ICT at SOSR.
The consolidated solution should lead to the high availability and elimination of SPOF (Single Point Of Failure), reliable and secure operation and easer maintenance.
Target topology
Districts
ing as a secure storage of the important data in order to provide full recovery of information systems.
The Office built up a modern computer centre at the level of Tier III (by Uptime Institute) from these resources, with the emphasis on redundancy of key ICT components.
The project objective was also the consolidation of database and selected infrastructure services.
Information sources and information and communication technologies
44 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
The budget was adjusted by nine budgetary measures to EUR 33 040 135 in the course of 2009.
The non-fiscal income was approved in the amount of EUR 805 388, included were the first budgeted current incomes in the amount of EUR 225 388 and incomes from expected sale of buildings in the administration of SOSR in the amount of EUR 580 000.
This amount also increased the budget of capital expenditures.
No-realized incomes from a sale of the building in the amount of
Non-budgetary incomes were received from external grants provided by the European Commission in order to introduce new statistical surveys.
Capital expenditures were spent on a payment of the communication infrastructure, machines and passenger cars.
Comparison of approved and adjusted budget
Approved budget
Adjusted budget
Election
Together EUR 3 890 010 were spent on the SR presidential election, the elections to the European Parliament and to the bodies of regional self-government.
Expenditures were spent mostly on overtime bonuses, bonuses and related contributions to insurance companies of employees participating in processing of results of elections.
Expenditures on goods and services were spent on the material provision of professional summarizing units, on the computer technique purchase, on technical support services and on work contracts.
The other expenses in the amount of EUR 557 404 were transferred to Infostat that technically and technologically provided the preparation and processing of all elections.
Capital expenditures in the amount of EUR 244 784 were spent on the computer and reprographic technique purchase.
Computer centre
The Ministry of Finance of the SR provided financial resources in the amount of EUR 10 000 000 from the reserve for purposes to rebuild the information and technological base of SOSR.
These resources were spent on preparation of study, reconstruction of computer centre rooms, building of computer and connecting networks, computer technique purchase, special equipment, software and trainings of employees.
The continuing optimization of statistical surveys and reduction of statistical burden of respondents and also producer will be a priority to 2012.
The cost reduction caused by a duty to provide statistical information is an ambition of the national statistics as well as of the European statistical system.
It will be especially focused on small and middle enterprises that tolerate higher burden compared with other enterprises, while they have often no access to advanced technologies or have not professional employees in order to meet requirements and they have to use professionally oriented providers of services to meet the requirements, what increases their costs.
The statistical producer will continue in the process to decrease the range and periodicity of acquired data, usage of administrative data sources, usage of mathematical and statistical methods to production of samples, imputations and data estimations.
The statistical information system will continue to stabilize and harmonize data and metadata, as logical part of continuing stabilization of data bases.
This activity will cover structural metadata (nomenclatures and definitions) and reference metadata, but imple
menting of the standard on exchange of statistical information SDMX (Statistical Data and Metadata Exchange) and the European standard to reference metadata will be taken into consideration.
The objective is to improve the quality of the metadata national system, to harmonize and integrate it into the European statistical system.
The priority objective of methodological activity will be a development and legislative issue of the national version of the classification of occupations fully harmonized with internationally standard classification of occupations ISCO 08.
The very important task of the field of registers will be the adaptation of the system of confidential data exchange relating to the group of enterprises between Eurostat and SOSR in form SDMX into the automated statistical information system, subsystem to administration of statistical registers (ASIS REGIS).
In 2010, additionally to standard activities relating to the compilation of annual accounts for 2009 and quarterly accounts (4th quarter of 2008 and first three quarters of 2009), atten
Priorities in 2010
48 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
tion of macro-economic statistics will be paid to activities focused on improving the quality of data basis to compilation of national accounts.
Further activities will be aimed at the preparation to compiling the order of national accounts at quarterly level to all sectors of the economy.
Attention will be further paid to summarization of documents required for the implementation of the classification SK NACE Rev.2 to national accounts in compliance with the prepared implementing regulation.
Also the system of compilation of supply/use table will be improved through new software tool SNA_NT.
Under the conclusions of the second visit of Eurostat on the description of sources and methods of the gross national income compilation (GNI Inventory) from September 2009, the adjustments required by Eurostat will be incorporated.
Price statistics will be aimed mostly at the implementation of the regulation of Eurostat relating to seasonal goods included in consumer basket to calculate harmonized index of consumer prices (HICP) and will continue with the experimental calculation of the index of real estate prices and its inclusion to the calculation of HICP.
The key task of external trade statistics will be to increase the quality of data provided to reporting units.
The objective of meetings will be to present the methodology of data providing, to remove unclearness and so achieve as high as possible quality of provided data.
Activities relating to modernization of methods to ensure inputs and also outputs of the statistical information system will continue in business statistics.
The final solution is the decrease of administrative response burden by searching possibilities of broader usage of administrative sources and more effective usage of the surveyed data in the information and publication system of the Statistical office.
The process of back-casting time series of indicators will continue in the structure of SK NACE Rev. 2 in structural business statistics.
The priority will be also the preparation of quality reports to evaluation of individual statistics and the increase of the harmonization of business statistics with macro-economic statistics.
One of the priorities in 2010 will be also the realization of the ad hoc survey on access of enterprises to finances.
The preparation of Farm structural census 2010 will be finished and before the end of the year data collection will begin.
The priority task of business tendency surveys will be the implementation of the classification of SK NACE Rev. 2 to process and back-cast time series of indicators by individual sectors and months.
Social statistics will process and publish the results of the European survey on health (EHIS 2009).
SOSR will provide statistical information in the field of financial and non-financial data on health and data on accidents at work and in 2008 to Eurostat.
It will realize providing of quantitative and qualitative data on the social protection in 2008 in compliance with the legislation and methodology of ESSPROSS.
The integration of selected relevant administrative sources to the automated statistical information system (ASIS) will continue, data collection to the the 4th Continuing Vocational Training Survey (CVTS4) will be prepared under the prepared regulation of the Commission.
The second important task will be the preparation and
processing the results of the elections to bodies of municipal self-government in November 2010.
The quality change of print publications shall support more the dissemination of knowledge on statistical indicators and their methodology, on possibilities and limits of their usage.
They will include the added value largely in the form of analytical texts and data visualization.
The implementation of the marketing strategic objective will require to intensify communication between different groups of statistical users and producers and to develop user-oriented statistics.
Priorities of information technologies will be aimed at three areas.
Attention will be paid mostly to the stabilization of the network WAN (Wide Area Network) in this field and to minimize the risks resulting from operation of server applications geographically separated from client working stations.
The second area will be implementation of ITSM processes (IT Service Management) in the field of the management of information technologies (IT).
Current trends, information and recommendations relating to the information technologies and ITSM will be applied to define process approaches and standardized recommendations.
The third area, the implementation of ITSM processes is closely connected with the previous area and will require not only the optimization of interfaces between the IT department and other departments of SOSR, but also construction of modern IT department in terms of the organizational structure of the Office.
The management of human resources will be influenced by economical measures in the state administration and with it related pressure on maximum economical usage of budget resources also in 2010.
The significant priority of this period will be a personnel provision of specific tasks of COP 2011, the elections to the National Council of the Slovak Republic and to bodies of municipal self-government.
The great opportunity to development of employees of SOSR will bring the realization of two projects of education funded by the European Social Fund aimed at development of user (client)-oriented national statistics.
More than 600 employees will join this projects and education activities to improve the quality of professional, managerial, communication and language competences.
Methodology and Informatics Section
National Accounts Department
Price Statistics Department
Department of Information Technology
Macroeconomic Statistics Section
Department of Strategy and Integrated Managment System
Statistical and Mathematical Methods Department
52 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
Regional Office Bratislava
Regional Office Tmava
Regional Office Trenčín
Regional Office Nitra
Regional Office Žilina
Regional Office Banská Byslrica
Regional Office Prešov
Regional Office Košice
Personal Office
54 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2009
Phone: +421-2-69250 101
Mo - Tu 8.30 - 12.00 13.00 - 14.30
Wed 8.30 - 12.00 13.00 - 16.00
Th
Fr
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in B. Bystrica
Mail room
Phone: +421-2-50236 474
Office hours:
Mo - Tu 8.30 - 10.30 14.30 - 15.30
Reception Phone: +421-2-50236 222
Annual Report
of the Statistical Office of the SR
Cooperation with the Institute of Informatics and
Statistics
We serve our customers
We publish periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography
Priorities in 2010
Organizational structure 2010
The greatest assets of the Office were employees of the Office and their professional capacity in 2010, while we do not consider an employee as a cost item, but as an asset that become a capital.
The office management paid a special attention to employees, their formation and development, e.g. improvement of working environment, further professional growth realized by a participation in educational events organized by the Office and educational institutions not only in domestic environment but also abroad and individual access to personnel development of employees.
At the end of 2010 a part of employees left the Office because their civil service posts were dissolved on the base of saving measures of the Government of the SR that were included in the Office's budget on 2011 and on the base of realized optimization of activities performed at the Office.
Regardless the departure of some long-standing and experienced employees and more difficult conditions in wage area caused by shortage of financial sources, the Office has required personnel and professional background to fulfil assigned tasks.
Stress and requirements on official European statistics and also requirements on national statistical offices from Eurostat increased hugely due to crisis of economic and financial situation last year 2010.
Some new initiatives were developed such as EU 2020 Strategy, Stiglitz-Sen Report, GDP and beyond, Vision
of European Statistics development on future century or project of measuring the life quality.
The total increase of the volume of provided statistical data was affected mostly by a considerable stress on increase of reliability and quality of official statistics.
The Statistical Office of the SR tried to catch every which way all new trends and development tendencies, and also participation in their preparation and implementation of them into practice in national environment.
This was included concretely in the amendment of the Act on State Statistics in extensive optimization of statistical processes, changes of organizational structure and preparation of transition to the cost management.
The development of the national account system in compliance with new regulations and directives of the European Union was also one of the main objectives in the field of macro-economic statistics in 2010.
on 2008 and also an estimate of 2009 based on new and adjusted data were compiled.
The field of price statistics implemented the regulation of Eurostat concerning to survey of prices of seasonal goods to the calculation of consumer price index.
New quality-adjustment methodology of goods and services of consumer basket was introduced in the calculation of consumer price index.
It came to amendment of the Act on State Statistics and it meant that the Foreign Trade Department had to provide sending of reports on foreign trade by reporting units since 1.4.2010 only in electronic form in 2010.
Population and Housing Census 2011 was not only one of the priority areas of the Section of Social Statistics and Demography, but also the whole Office.
Processes relating to legislation such as the Provision on characteristics, basic features and structure of the surveyed data and the Government regulation defining
Based on new trends, development of labour and wage statistics made progress in integration with information systems available in external environment.
Joining annual statistical report with department survey had a positive impact to a decrease of administrative burden of reporting units, an elimination of duplicities and savings of financial and capacity sources of the Office.
Family account carried out except standard data collection also data collection on expen
Harmonization of sample surveys in households (Sample survey in households and Survey on incomes and living conditions) continued implementing usage of socalled core variables.
Website of the Statistical Office becomes the priority form gradually in accordance with the strategic aim in the field of the statistical information dissemination.
The development of internet continued satisfying the needs of users as much as possible via creation of interactive services.
The content of online databases, pre-defined tables and number of electronic products was supplemented.
Forms of direct communications with main users were developed and statistical education was provided.
Opinions and requirements of customers were included in production of statistical products and in dissemination forms.
In publication activity the Office aimed at production
of added value products, i.e. products with knowledge and visual interpretation.
Having regard to remembering the World Statistics Day that UN appointed on 20th October 2010 the Office performed many activities in order to bring mission and main activities of official statistics in different areas of society closer to the Slovak public and to present achieved results of SOSR.
Open Doors Day at headquarter and in workplaces of SOSR in regional cities was one of the main activities contributed to the celebration of the World Statistics Day.
This day, information on different statistical areas was provided and results of statistical work were presented for more than 1200 interested persons.
Main activities:
Title:
Acronym:
Management:
Identification of organization
Last year the development of the quality management system of SOSR introduced by the standard ISO 9001:2008 continued realizing activities creating appropriate preconditions to increase its efficiency in order to allow managing increasing demands of customers on a range and quality of statistical products in strongly regulated environment and with limited financial sources.
Preparing implementation of this change was finished by the end of 2010; its implementation will begin in next year.
Also results and knowledge from optimization were used at the level of statistical reporting system.
The optimization result was also new organizational chart (respecting optimized processed model) with decreased number of posts of SOSR.
Other action programme contributed to the realization of the mentioned aim is the cost management project and gradual introduction of controlling in SOSR.
Last year realization of programme continued defining an approach to introduction of controlling in office conditions - monitoring system of objective achievement of SOSR under optimally used sources and also an approach to building its information support - managerial information system of SOSR.
The implementation of programmes was supported by promoting of common recognized values of SOSR, i.e. mostly those, which praise a personal responsibility of employees to achieve results of the office under optimally expended costs.
The level of the quality management system was examined by the internal audits performed in selected processes of SOSR.
The audits examined the system harmonization with requirements of the standard ISO 9001:2008 aimed at fulfilment of strategic objectives of the Office and related action programmes.
Proposals for improvements resulting from internal audits and also from other sources of improvements were included in the fifth Report on evaluation of the quality management system of SOSR.
The supervisory audit performed by the classification society Bureau Veritas Certification confirmed also the harmonization of the implemented quality management system
with the requirements of the ISO 9001:2008 in October 2010.
The successful audit again confirmed that QMS of SOSR creates appropriate conditions for development of the Office towards higher efficiency.
10 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
The strategic priority of SOSR to 2012 is a decrease of response burden for respondent and also for producer.
Obtaining information on time required to fill up a statistical form is therefore a part of each statistical survey.
SOSR conducted measuring on time in 2008 and starting with 2010 it will be conducted yearly.
SOSR as a coordinator of the state statistical surveys will integrate to this process also ministries and state organization conducting the state statistical surveys since 2011.
Basic database will be build up and gradually fill in order to measure and analyse burden of respondents in performance of reporting duty.
Evaluation of burden in terms of producer presented positive results; there was measured item burden in 2010.
SOSR decreased item burden by 22,29 % in 2009 compared with 2008.
Effort in optimization of statistical reporting system did not bring only a reduction of the number of items in statistical forms by 21,53 %, but also a decrease in the number of reporting units by 7,99 %.
Also re-evaluation of periodicity of modules in statistical forms had a considerable share in a reduction of burden.
The long-lasting problem is responding of tradesmen, who tolerate higher burden compared with big enterprises, while they often have not an access to advanced technologies or have not specialized employees in order to carry out administrative duties.
They must refer to relevant providers of services, what increase their costs.
For that reason tradesmen were excluded from the population of reporting units in monthly statistical survey in trade, restaurants and accommodation in 2010.
Other monthly statistical surveys on
2011 were adjusted the same way, i.e. in the sector of transport, information and communication and selected market services.
SOSR reduced the same way also a range of the surveyed data and a sample in the survey Annual report on physical persons not enrolled in the Business Register (Roč 3-01) in 2010.
In these activities, use of mathematical and statistical methods plays an important role for production of statistical samples, data processing, modelling and integration of data from different sources.
In harmonization with European-wide trend, data on non-surveyed groups of entrepreneurs will be acquired from administrative sources and on the base of statistical models.
The harmonization of national statistics within the European Statistical System is carried out by adoption of legal acts of the European Community and the European Union.
SOSR on the base of these facts issued changes and amendments of the Programme of State Statistical Surveys 2009-2011 (hereafter called “Programme”).
In 2011, surveys on further vocational training in enterprises (CVTS 1-99) and adult education survey (AES 1-99) will be conducted in 2011.
The purpose of these surveys with five-year periodicity is to acquire information on further vocational training in terms of the enterprise education policy and draft and regulation of the lifelong education policy within the European Union.
The survey Práca 6-99 Survey on labour in municipalities and municipal regions was excluded based on re-evaluation of needs of the Ministry of Interior of the SR.
Periodicity of 14 surveys will decrease from monthly to quarterly in the field of price statistics.
Statistical classifications and codes continued developing in compliance with international standards in 2010.
Basic methodological documents containing a general methodological part, notes and correspondence tables between the old and new classification of occupations were prepared in order to implement the revised international standard classification of occupations ISCO 08 to statistical information system.
Supporting documents for this docu
ments published in the second half of 2010 at the Office's website were papers issued by the International Labour Organization (ILO) and also conclusions and opinions adopted by the EU Member States in the relevant working group of Eurostat.
Statistical classification of the fields of study was issued by the Decree of SOSR
12 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
The annex of the decree includes a converter to international level of education according to the international classification of education ISCED 1997.
The main objective of these activities is continuous integration of the national ASIS REGIS system into the system of the European electronic network of EGR.
What the last year brought in methodology
In March 2010 the collection and calculation of indicators on demography of enterprises with employees and indicators on demography of fast-growing enterprises under the common methodology of Eurostat and OECD was completed.
The methodology of data imputation on the number of employees in small enterprises based on administrative data provided for this purpose by Datacentre was repeatedly applied to calculate indicators.
14 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
The development of the national account system was one of the main objectives of the macro-economic statistics in compliance with the new regulations and directions of the European Union in 2010 too.
Last year the final annual sector accounts for 2007, preliminary ones for 2008 and estimation of 2009 were compiled based on new and adjusted data.
Main changes related to methodological changes based on GNI mission recommendations, such as the incorporation of smuggling of alcohol and tobacco as one of the illegal activities into national accounts in whole time series and the record of costs relating to liquidation of an insurance event.
In 2010 SOSR calculated the compensation for small companies exempted from VAT for purposes of own sources flowing from VAT relied on the methodology prepared by Eurostat and in compliance with the requirement of the Ministry of Finance of the SR.
The final commodity and sector supply/use tables for 2007 were compiled at current and constant prices of the previous year.
Time series 1995 - 1997 reflected changes resulting from the incorporation of smuggling of alcohol and tobacco as one of the illegal activities and the record of costs relating to liquidation of an insurance event in compliance with the annual national accounts.
Based on the revised balanced tables of supply/use 2000 - 2005 and the revised quarterly sector structures for the 1st quarter of 1995 and for the 2nd quarter of 2010, time series of indicators of the produc
tion and income method were back-casted to constant prices of the previous year and recalculation was realized by chain procedure of volume indices to reference year 2000.
Quarterly data were compiled fully in compliance with the ESA 95 transmission programme and regularly released within 65 days once the reference quarter ended.
In addition to above mentioned activities, the publication Development of the GDP and its components 2005 - 2010 was issued and was provided to universities, research experts as well as for broader analytical community.
Price statistics implemented the regulation of Eurostat concerning survey on prices of seasonal goods to the calculation of consumer price index.
New methodology relating to quality adjustments of goods and services in consumer basket was introduced to the cal
Prices of production statistics began to prepare revision of weight schemes in order to calculate price indices of production statistics.
The most significant can be mentioned: calculation of GDP weights (volumes and prices) expressing GDP in the purchasing power parity for purposes of international comparison, price surveys of selected comparable goods, services, construction projects and investment units, surveys on wages in state administration and surveys of rental prices.
GDP - current prices GDP - constant prices of previous year
HDP - constant prices calculated by chain procedure of volumes
16 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
trade statistics provided sending of reports on foreign trade by reporting units since 1.
4.
2010 only in electronic form.
This significant step preceded a campaign, in which SOSR gave notice to reporting units with reporting duty that the Act and also their duty changed.
The objective of transition from reports on paper to reports in electronic form was not only to decrease burden of reporting units but also to increase the quality and to transmit data on time.
Except this task monthly data on import and export together with indices of import prices and indices of export and import prices to national accounts and to departments were also transmitted to Eurostat.
As in the previous years, amended legislation was implemented also in 2010.
Changes also related to the application programme equipment to process data.
Two grants dealt with adjustments, except of solver, the External Trade Department of SOSR, which methodically managed adjustments of the APV and their subsequent testing after implementation, took part in them.
7 trainings with almost 100 participants were organized to increase awareness of reporting units of the INTRASTAT-SK system in 2010.
Trainings contained, except basic information on INTRASTAT-SK system, also an overview on newest changes and mostly included answers to specific questions of participants.
Meetings with reporting units having problems with the data quality and data transmission on time were realized.
Reporting discipline improvements were recorded in these reporting units after meetings.
The centre of activities in business short-term statistics was aimed at meeting the deadlines of the first data transmission, i.e. one of the priorities of Eurostat and the European Central Bank.
The comprehensive evaluation of the compatibility with the regulation on short-term statistics showed SOSR was included in the first category of the member countries with the best level of compatibility.
A special questionnaire on compilation method of the indicator on input prices in services was prepared and transmitted.
SOSR also took part in an evaluation of the response burden and costs of the statistical office resulting from implementing requirements of the regulation on short-term statistics and based on data on working time required to filling up questionnaires and on data processing for reference year 2009.
The annual structural statistics compiled sets of the final indicators for 2008 and sets of the preliminary data for 2009 and transmitted them on time.
The centre of activities in this area was focused on preparation of datasets in new structure of SK NACE Rev. 2 classification, as well as on implementation of requirements of new implementing regulation concerning structural statistics relating to new structure of output sets, new classification of indicators and new technical format of data transmission.
One-shoot survey on access of enterprises to finances was conducted.
Output files were transmitted to Eurostat in required date.
Datasets for 2008 on domestic foreign affiliates were compiled and transmit
ted in new classification SK NACE Rev. 2 and datasets on non-domestic foreign affiliates were compiled and transmitted according to the old structure of NACE in compliance with European regulations.
The activities of the business statistics were focused on further increase of harmonization with the European legislation, intput and output quality of the statistical system and data availability rate in databases of Eurostat and SOSR.
International activities were aimed at the realization of project activities related to the implementation of new regulations and to the harmonization of classifications and codes in cooperation with Eurostat and the European Commission.
Analytical works were realized and then it was decided that tradesmen in the sector of transport, selected market services, information and communication will not be addressed monthly in the calendar year 2011.
A range of the surveyed indicators with monthly periodicity was re-evaluated and some of them will not be included into survey.
The highest attention in business statistics of construction, trade and services was paid to the data basis for publication system of SOSR and international organizations.
During the year, recalculations of time series were prepared by SK NACE Rev. 2. in more detailed
18 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
structures and the data basis published at the portal and in databases of SOSR was gradually extended.
Great attention was paid to preparing the input methodology and to increasing the quality of information system outputs.
Working consultations of the employees of SOSR regional workplaces and reporting units dealt with methodological problems of reporting the surveyed indicators, problems of statistical data collection realization and statistical data processing.
The centre of activities in business surveys was focused on the preparation of documents and realization of retrospective back-casting time series of available data basis according
to SK NACE Rev. 2 classification on monthly basis since the beginning of realization of harmonized business surveys.
Required data of industry, construction, retail trade, services, investment in industry and consumer barometer were regularly monthly delivered in compliance with timetable of international projects.
The data basis quality continued improving by individual consultations with respondents and by improvement of the return rate of questionnaires in order to calculate confidence indicators in individual sectors and to produce the synthetic composite economic sentiment indicator.
Development tasks aimed at updating balance tools and software products, broader usage of model solutions
Development of Industrial production index and Orders
IPI seasonally adjusted IPI WD adjusted
Orders seasonally adjusted Orders
and mathematical and statistical methods to short-term prognosticating and prediction of next development including compilation of flash estimates of macro-economic indicators and innovated version of the composite leading indicator in the SR conditions with usage of survey on short-term quantitative and qualitative statistical information were performed in cooperation with research area.
One of the most important realized activities of the statistics of industry was successful finishing the Eurostat grant project aimed at a decrease of response burden and also a decrease of costs on short-term surveys in statistics of products.
The number of surveyed products decreased in monthly report and as a direct connection to this also the number of reporting units of addressed product modules was reduced.
It came to a decrease of response burden in short-term report also based on stopping the data survey at the level of establishment units.
Statistics of industry as a responsible body for data on food safety based on the decision of the European Commission paid attention to three basic spheres: food control and monitoring, ecological agriculture and food consumption.
The cooperation continued with relevant responsible bodies for relevant questions, such as the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of the SR, State Veterinary and Food Administration of the SR, Central Control and Testing Institution of Agriculture and other organizations.
It is very demanding and specific survey on structure and usage of areas of cultivated vineyards.
The second survey was preparation of Farm Structural Census, which is one of the most comprehensive and most complex statistical surveys on activity and structure of agricultural farms.
The survey relates to two basic groups of reporting units.
There are business subjects with unambiguous identification that provide agricultural activity as the primary or secondary activity and households with agricultural activity without unambiguous identification.
Statistics of environment was aimed mostly at introduction of three priority environment business accounts that are a part of the proposal of the regulation of the European Parliament and the Council concerning environment business accounts.
The pilot project was realized, the output of which are compiled data on account of material flows.
Waste management statistics processed and transmitted data on statistics of waste to Eurostat based on duty resulting from the regulation.
Quality report of waste statistics was prepared in cooperation with the Slovak Environmental Agency.
Information was processed and published from surveyed data in extend
The project of survey on innovations was successfully finished by revised version of Oslo manual, results were provided to international institutions and broad public within the publication system of the Office.
Quality reports of these statistics were prepared by standard criterion of quality evaluation and delivered to Eurostat.
Activities in the field of updating software products to processing data in statistics of research, development and innovations, optimization of production of samples and also tasks focused on evaluation of the statistical data quality continued cooperating with relevant department workplaces of the Office and research sphere.
In statistics of energy the Office took part in the second phase of the worldwide consultations to the draft of the International recommendations on energy statistics prepared by UN Statistical Division.
These recommendations will contain a description of basic terms and data sources, data processing strategies, energy balances, quality evaluations and data dissemination.
Consultations on prepared changes in common international questionnaires of Eurostat / IEA / UN will continued and based on results, changes of the collection and processing system of statistical surveys in the field of energy will be prepared.
In the field of road transport, the Office joined the grant cooperation with Eurostat.
Statistical surveys on lifetime mileage were conducted by methods that SOSR realized for the first time (surveys in households, usage of data from databank of technical control stations).
Tourism statistics continued compiling tourism satellite account.
Basic data are regularly published at the SOSR portal.
The Office joined the international project aimed at a decrease of burden of entrepreneurs in tourism as for statistical data providing.
It will be reached by direct interconnection of the data collection system of SOSR with information systems of accommodation facilities.
For the first time, the Office realized the survey on active tourism, where respondents were foreign visitors in the SR.
A good cooperation with international organizations continued.
Representatives of SOSR took part in international workshops of Eurostat, European Commission, OECD, International Energy Agency and UNECE.
Business statistics organized two-day professional consultation for Tajikistan experts at SOSR within the twining project, it related to preparation of input data in order to calculate industrial production index.
In October, two-week mission was held in the Statistical Agency of Tajikistan in Dushanbe.
Expert consultations were
held also in the field of road transport statistics in Tajikistan.
Representatives of the Statistical Agency of Tajikistan were acquainting in detail with the week survey in road transport including programme equipment during the visit in March.
Working meetings aimed at giving experiences continued also by the visit of our experts in Tajikistan.
Business statistics took part in the project Programme of modernization of business and trade statistics (MEETS) focused on usage of administrative data sources in annual business reports.
R&D employees in physical persons by regions and occupation in 2009
Natural sciences Agricultural sciences
Technological sciences Social sciences
Medical and pharmac. sciences Humanities
Prešovský kraj Banskobystrický kraj Žilinský kraj
Nitriansky kraj Trenčiansky kraj
Trnavský kraj
Bratislavský kraj
22 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
Standard monitoring of the development of the population number and structure continued in demographic statistics.
Information about the population development was provided to users; possibilities of data acquiring from administrative sources were verified.
To prepare Population and Housing Census 2011 (PHC 2011), activities relating to the creation of legislative conditions were realized,
Obtained data will be used in tasks on re-evaluation of living wage construction in 2011 - 2012.
Required information on 2009 was transmitted to Eurostat, data of survey were provided also to other external users.
The survey on 2010 was conducted; the survey on 2011 has been prepared methodically and organizationally.
Development of labour and wage statistics moved forward to integration with information systems available in external environment.
Based on inclusion of additional information on job vacancies from the sources of the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR into its calculations, the Statistical Office provides currently comprehensive information on number and structure of vacant posts and filled vacant posts in the economy of the SR in accordance with EU requirements.
This statistical area was fully harmonized with regulations of the European legislation and Eurostat recommendations.
Moreover preparation works began to introduce computer data collection in field phase of labour force sample survey.
In order to provide equal access of all users to statistical information on labour market, all publications of this area were displayed in full wording at Internet.
The most significant task of social statistics was the realization and ending of the first European Health Interview Survey (EHIS 2009), it will continue to release results in 2011.
(clerks)
Professional soldiers
Unskilled and non-qualif. empl.
24 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
systematically to relevant state institutions, international organizations and to public database.
SOSR provided statistical information of financial and non-financial data in health, data on occupational diseases, work injuries and crime for 2008 to Eurostat.
Quantitative and qualitative data on social protection on 2008 were provided in compliance with the legislation and ESSPROS methodology and qualitative and quantitative data on active and passive labour market policies on 2009 were provided in compliance with the methodology of database of labour market policies.
Demographic Research Centre (DRC) dealt with 8 planned tasks assigned by SOSR based on contract in 2010.
All tasks were fulfilled in close cooperation with employees of the Social and Demographic Statistics Section.
The result of DRC activity was 7 publications issued directly in INFOSTAT.
Five of them are analytical (Population development in districts of the SR, Life expectancy by EHIS, Migration flows in the SR, Death Causes and Education as a difference factor of reproduction behaviour) and two were focused methodologically (Calculation of experimental prognosis of population of the SR to 2050 and Calculation methodology of tables of fertility).
DRC also prepared documents for publication Population Movement of the SR 2009 and documents for publishing the life tables to SOSR within planned tasks.
DRC continued developing the cooperation with domestic and non-domestic demographic institutions.
Employees of DRC participated in writing of one foreign and one domestic science monograph, they presented ten articles in professional periodicals and wrote many reviews.
The participation in conferences included 3 active presentations abroad and 8 contributions in domestic conferences and workshops.
DRC has a representation in editorial board of two periodicals Slovak Statistics and Demography and Gender, the same opportunities, research.
DRC was a co-organizer of the Demographic Discussion Afternoons (in cooperation with the Slovak Statistical and Demographical Society and with the Faculty of Natural Sciences of UC).
Topics were aimed at current demographic problems.
Great attention was paid to communication on internet via own website as well as the website SLOVAKPOPIN, which is a result of cooperation with SOSR and which contains detailed demographic data.
The year 2010 was significant and difficult at the election statistics department.
Regular elections to the National Council of the SR and to the bodies of municipal self-government and also referendum initiated by the petition of inhabitants were held.
Elections to the National Council of the Slovak Republic were held in June 2010.
SOSR cooperated with the Ministry of Interior of the SR to prepare processing of election results.
It issued the methodology in compliance with organizational and technical provision of elections and prepared the project of automated processing of election results.
Electronic register of candidates available for a public at the Office's website was prepared
from registered candidate lists.
Preliminary results were available at the Office's website during the processing election results.
The Office published the final election results in print form and also to the level of districts at its Office's website after a signature of the record of the Central Election Commission.
The President of the SR declared a referendum based on the petition of inhabitants on 18th September 2010.
Inhabitants made decision on six questions.
Preparation of the referendum processing was demanding because it clashed with preparation of processing of elections to the bodies of municipal self-government.
Participation of entitled inhabitants in referendum
Non-turnout 77,16 %
Turnout 22,84 %
26 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
Preliminary and final results were published at the Office's website.
The Statistical Office issued also a publication with referendum results.
At the end of November, SOSR realized processing of results of the elections to the bodies of municipal self-government.
Programme equipment was displayed at the Office's website.
Election results were continuously published at the Office's website.
The cooperation is based on the contract concluded by both organizations for a relevant year and is aimed at the priority statistical activities of the Office.
\ development and innovation - of consolidated data basis and subsystems ZBER, METIS and REGIS relating to the automated statistical information system (ASIS); programme equipment in BLAISE on 2010
\ updating and development - database of; Urban and Municipal Statistics (UMS) and Urban Information System (UIS); software for VZCD, business tendency surveys, agricultural estimates and balancing energy;
\ calculations - THFK at quarterly level by method of commodity flows; life expectancy in health by EHIS 2009; mortality tables, marriage tables and fertility tables;
\ analyses, studies and prognoses - of pension funds; quarterly national accounts; GDP and employment estimates; sets of farms in the sector of households; population development in districts of the SR 2009; population development of the SR to 2009; migration flows in the SR; education as a difference factor of reproduction behaviour; accounts in social statistics.
The activity of INFOSTAT for 2010 is completely documented in a special report available at the Office's website www.statistics.sk, in part About us/Key documents/Annual Reports.
28 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
Satisfying customer needs was determining in communication with users in order to meet their requirements and to fulfil strategic objectives in the field of marketing.
Based on the approved Marketing Plan of SOSR for 2010, many activities were carried out in order to meet objectives.
The Statistical Office paid attention to required portfolio of products and its providing to users on time.
Regarding domestic customers, there were especially legislative and executive bodies of state administration, mostly the National Bank of Slovakia, the Ministry of Finance of the SR, Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR, the Ministry of Economy of the SR, the Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the SR.
128 datasets were provided to these bodies together.
Obtained statistical information was used for management and decision making processes.
Regarding international and intergovernmental organizations, there were mostly EUROSTAT, Organization for European Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), Economic and Financial Affairs Committee of the European Commission (ECFIN), International Labour Organization (ILO), and International Energy Agency (IEA).
277 products in the form of different questionnaires, datasets and tables of all statistical domains were provided them in
Marketing activities were aimed at understanding of customers and increasing their knowledge in the field of statistics and to find
expectations of key customers.
Individual professional departments and workplaces of SOSR in districts organized many working meetings, forums and personal discussions with interesting customers.
The most significant activity of the year was World Statistics Day, which the United Nation declared on 20th October 2010.
The objective was to increase knowledge of society on the official statistics mission and fundamental values, such as public service, profesionality and integrity.
Based on this event, celebration of which was held for the first time in the statistical history, SOSR prepared many interesting activities such as Open Door Day, electronic quiz on statistics at the Office's website, competition Young Statisticians of Year, Sport Day of SOSR.
Open Door Day allowed to acquaint with work and products of SOSR to interested persons directly at the headquarters and individual workplaces in regions, they could obtain information on upcoming PHC 2011, on statistical information dissemination, on retrievals from the Organization Register, they had a possibility to work with online databases of the Statistical Office and Eurostat.
One of the concomitant activity was also statistical forenoons and afternoons organized by SOSR workplaces in regions for different target groups.
Great assets were meetings with users to get a feedback of the Office on needs, expectations and methods how to develop contains and forms of production of statistical products and statistical information dissemination next time.
On the occassion of World Statistics Day the Statistical Offfice and workplaces in regions issued presenta
We serve our customers
tion and information documents aimed at different statistical topics.
Open Door Day was greeted very positively by broad public.
SOSR provided different statistical information via information service.
In 2010 together 3 118 requests were met by information service of the headquarters, of which 2 654 were for domestic users and 464 for non-domestic users.
The most requests were registered from students and teachers (28,4 %), further from the enterprises, associations, fields (21,6 %) and from broad public (17,9 %).
The highest interest was in information of demography and social statistics (35 %).
Requests of users were met also at the information sections of workplaces in regions, which met 3 225 requests over the year.
Moreover the Office met a considerable number of requests by phone or by personal visit of customers.
Over the year, public database SLOVSTAT at the Office's website was intensively used by the professional and laic public.
10 743 registered users visited the public database in total and 169 503 data extractions were realized from 814 tables.
Users were interested mostly in indicators from labour market, quarterly national accounts, prices and demographic statistics.
The most extractions were made by students (almost one half) and by users from business sector (almost one quarter).
50 831 users visited the regional RegDat database last year, they realized 68 805 visits and 292,8 thousand data extractions from 280 data matrices.
Compared with the previous year, the number of extractions increased almost one third.
Users were interested most in statistical regional data on demography and labour market, i.e. almost 60 percentage share from ten topics.
Requests met by Information Service of SOSR by groups of customers
Students and teachers
Enterprises, associations, fields Broad public and others
International and external institutions
State administration and municipality Financial institutions
Science and research Media
30 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
Share of retrievals of SLOVSTAT database by topics
Based on the Catalogue of Publications 2010, statistical publications were continuosly issued in printing and also in electronic form.
The Office issued presentation publications in order to apply new conceptual plans in production of statistical
Multi-domain statistics 2,7%
Demography and social statistics 43,1%
Statistical infrastructure 3,3%
Business statistics 15,5%
Banking, finance, foreign trade 3,6%
Macro-economic statistics 28,5%
Agriculture, forestry 3,3%
Other interesting titles issued by the Office were
Share of generated tables of RegDat by topics
Demography
Labour market Business statistics
Agriculture, forestry Organization statistics Multi-domain statistics
Banking, finance
32 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
Slovak Republic in figures 2010 and Trends of social development in the SR 2010.
The publication ESSPROS - Expenditures and incomes on social protection 2007 - 2008 was issued additionally to the Catalogue of Publications.
Based on united conception of the publication activity of SOSR workplaces in regions, each of them issued three publications (Developpment of Population in... region 2009, Our region and ... region in figures) containing basic demographic, economic and socal statistics for each region in 2010.
They were issued in the same structure and design for the first time.
Two titles issued additionally to the Catalogue of Publications were interesting: presentation publication in printing form Gender equality in the SR and EU and electronic publication Gender equality 2010.
In international activities the Office joined the Eurostat grant project European Statistical Data Support (ESDS) relating to support of users of the European statistical information.
The European Statistical Data Support Centre working at the Statistical Office (Centre) gave an assistance to navigation of users
at the website of Eurostat, to searching the European statistical data in databases of Eurostat, and also to answering methodological questions.
Information available in the part European Statistics - ESDS at the SOSR's website was updated continuously.
The propagation leaflet on Eurostat was released in order to propagate the European statistics and to provide information disseminated at its website and information on services of the Centre for users.
We publish periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography
The periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography celebrated 20th year of its publication in 2010.
On this occasion the periodical editorial board made decision to issue an especial number containing contributions of the members of the editorial board, which evaluate individual areas of the periodical in its twentieth history.
The periodical presents scientific articles and information articles in chapters, professional articles from statistics and demography in discussions and opinions submitted by employees of SOSR to the editorial board, professionals from universities and faculties of the whole Slovakia, scientific workplaces and other institutions.
Also analytical studies, overviews and professional opinions of individual authors are presented in the periodical.
Some historical studies from demography were again released in the periodical in 2010.
The editorial board was leaded by its new president, the general director of the Section of Social Statistics and Demography of SOSR, Mrs. Ľudmila Ivančíková in 2010.
Other members of the periodical editorial board were in 2010: Pavol Baláž (SOSR), František Bernadič (SOSR), Mikuláš Cár (NBS), Ján Haluška (INFOSTAT), Ivan Janiga (STU), Milan Olexa, Rastislav Potocký (MFF UK), Eva Rublíková (EU), Marianna Štalmašková (SOSR), Boris Vaňo (INFOSTAT - DRC), Anna Volná.
34 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
The Office was involved in many international activities, mostly in activities relating to the European Statistical System (ESS).
The other legal acts were drafted, such as proposal of the regulation on tourism statistics, environment accounts, permanent crops in agriculture, carriage of goods by road and on the system of national and regional accounts.
The Commission adopted 29 implementing regulations from different statistical areas.
Additionally to activities of ESS the Office cooperated also with other international organizations and institutions, such as Statistical Commission of the UN, Conference on European Statisticians at the UN ECE, OECD, ILO, FAO, UNESCO, WTO and its representatives actively participated in statistical events of these organizations.
The Office intensified activities of an assistance to the third countries in 2010.
The project Strengthening of the statistical system of Tajikistan continued implementing the third year, it was financed by the World Bank; experts of the Office were involved in many components of the project.
Over the year, components of statistics of poverty and transport statistics were finished, while activities in components of statistics of industry and quarterly national accounts continued also in 2011.
Employees of the Office visited Tajikistan six times, i.e. 13 individual visits to assist Tajikistan colleagues directly in place.
Project activities of the Slovak experts were appreciated by the head of consortium and also by the statistical institutes of receiving country.
In May, an employee of the Government Office of the Serbian Republic visited the Office in order to consult implementation of pre-accession assistance provided to candidate countries.
An employee of the Statistical Office of Monte
External business trips by purpose
Eurostat/EC 59,53 %
EU projects 2,79 % Council 4,66 %
Bilateral actions 6,51 %
Trainings/participants 6,51 %
Trainings/lecturers 3,72 %
Workshops and conferences 16,28 %
36 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
Negro attended 4-month professional training relating to social statistics at SOSR.
Many delegations of external and international statistical institutions visited the Office.
One of the most significant was the visit of the President of the Czech Statistical Office Iva Ritschelová shortly after her appointment to this post.
Both representatives of the CZSO provided valuable information and practical experiences from the EU presidency to top and middle management of SOSR.
SOSR employees took part in 215 external business trips (EBT) in 2010, i.e. 292 individual commencements.
Almost two third of these commencements related to meeting of working groups of EU institutions.
Other business trips related to grant projects, bilateral cooperation or they were aimed at active participation in workshops and conferences organized by other international institutions.
Employees of the Office dealt with 35 grant projects funded by the European Union, which contributed to the implementation of new European regulations and development of the Slovak statistics last year.
Personal politics of SOSR was significantly affected by optimization of processes, saving measures and by a need providing personal capacities to fulfil specific tasks of the elections to the National Council of the SR, to the bodies of municipal self-government and PHC 2011.
The complex system of personal work has been develop further in difficult conditions (mostly in terms of financial sources), this system influences and strengthens identifica
tertiary II. level 48,1%
tertiary I. level 2,9%
full secondary with A levels 45,7%
secondary without A levels 2,7%
primary 0,6%
tion of employees with work and institution, creates an adequate space for permanent development of knowledge base, professional growth and self-realization of employees and is based on satisfactory quantity and quality of personal information.
quarter and 666,9 employees at the workplaces of SOSR in regions in 2010.
79 % women and 21 % men were employed at the Office.
From the total number of 130 heads, 70 % represented women and 30 % represented men.
Age structure
under 30 years 9,3%
31 - 40 years 16,0%
41 - 50 years 29,0%
51 - 60 years 36,9%
over 60 years 8,8%
In 2010 a permanent pressure to maximal economical usage of budgetary resources required to take optimization and saving measures successfulness of which will be possible to check over the next years.
The decision on organizational changed, which decreased the number of posts by 10 % at the Office and the organization chart of the headquarters was changed, was approved and effective from 1.
1.
2011.
Due to this organization change, 71 employees with civil servant or working relation leaved the Office because of dissolving their positions (redundancy).
Activities relating to saving measures and to change of organization structure (negotiations on ending civil servant / working relation, preparation of input documentation, change of codes of sections and updating of all personal databases, announcement on change of organization section to employees, temporary and permanent redeployment of employees, appointment of new head employees and others) were significantly reflected in extending of administrative activities of the personnel office.
Quality of personal information was increased by introduction of unified electronic
attendance system, which created a condition for successful implementation of new information system of monitoring the worked hours.
The education activities approved in the Education Plan of Employees for 2010 were realized in the field of education of SOSR employees; planned events were supplemented by another workshops and trainings resulting from current requests of individual departments and employees during the year.
professional performance of employees,
\ obtaining or increasing professional knowl
edge and skills
\ development of skills to use information
and communication technologies,
\ language preparation.
Following trainings were realized in managerial preparation and increase of professional performance of employees: Couching, Training of effective communications with customers, Presentation and effective public performance, Training of personnel development,
40 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
How to able to cope with problems and workshop focused on preparation and realization of optimization of processes in the Office conditions.
Trainings attending by 99 head employees, personal capacities and other specialists contributed to improving the quality of managerial decision making processes and development of knowledge to react flexibly on changing internal and external environment of the Office and customer request.
Specialists in the field of statistics have a particular place in obtaining and increasing professional knowledge and skills.
The Personnel Office realized the education programme Schola Statistica in cooperation with internal and external lecturers.
It included not only training for new employees, or employees with minimal professional practice, but also professional trainings focused on selected mathematical and statistical methods used to process statistical data.
Trainings were realized in the education centre of SOSR in Klatova Nová Ves or in classrooms of Infostat.
88 employees in total took part in the education programme Schola Statistica.
82 employees took part in 58 professional education events at international level.
Professional statistical trainings organized within the European Statistical Training Programme were a part of these events.
The objective of trainings was to increase required knowledge and skills in the field of the European statistics, to participate in knowledge exchange and to provide important information on the European Statistical System.
Except statistical education events, other employees of the Office took part also in profes
sional education according to their professional orientation (e.g. legislation, management of human resources, wages, economy and operation, public procurement and others).
The professional education is closely connected also with further field of education - development of knowledge to use information and communication technologies.
Education in this area was mostly connected with key tasks of the Office and 922 employees completed it in 2010.
Language education was an integral part of the internal education.
280 employees in total took part in half-intensive and intensive trainings of English and French language.
6 281 employees took part totally in 595 education activities in 2010.
The total costs spent on the education of employees of the Office amounted to EUR 32 049.
Except standard education, self-education of employees, which largely contributed to their personnel and professional development, came into focus.
653 employees used this education form.
Library of SOSR provided its services to 2 937 readers (of which 2 141 were external visitors and 796 employees of the Office).
5 062 borrowings were registered in the library during the year.
The main activity of the library is aimed at supplementing, registration and providing of library fund, to which 1 076 titles (of which 504 were publications issued by SOSR).
72 titles of daily press and periodicals were registered continuously.
EUR 14 923 was spent to purchase professional literature, subscription of daily press and periodicals in financial statement.
The Office moved on to the realization phase of the national project Electronic services of SOSR in the field of development of information systems.
Introduction of quality customer-oriented electronic services: \ increase of information value, availability and transparency of statistical data and information via production-oriented access, \ decrease of administrative response burden through full electronization of data collection in all forms of statistical surveys, \ electronization of processes for entering results of voting in elections and referendums, \ providing geographical presentation of statistical data.
Production of united, fully integrated information environment of SOSR in the context of information system of public administration (ISPA): \ production of transparency information portal statistics.sk, which allows united presentation of statistical data from all public sources and will be connected with the central portal of public administration (CPPA) and international data sources, \ production of functional interconnections of all information systems of statistical office in order to make possible procedural operation of organization,
\ usage of basic modules of CPPA to provide electronic services, \ building of electronic interconnections with administrative data sources and information systems of international statistical organizations.
Support of conceptual view in activities relating to work with statistical data: \ introduction of standards to exchange statistical data in information system of public administration, \ providing of integration and usage of ISPA registers to administer reporting duties and all forms of statistical surveys, \ introduction of module on administration of basic codes in ISPA
The period of the project realization started in August 2010 was set on 24 months.
The Office started to deal with the availability of services and related components of information and communication technologies (ICT) already in 2009.
Reasons for making change were mostly an old server architecture, an insufficient providing of key ICT components and relatively high demands on ICT administration.
The aim of new strategy should be the high available solution of IT services with the emphasis on redundancy of localities and components of ICT.
The whole process of modernization was divided into three phases:
2. modernization of a secondary Datacentre (DC II) in the headquarters of SOSR
42 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
3. building of a backup Datacentre (DC III) at the workplace of SOSR in Nitra in case of breakdown, serving as a secure storage of the important data in order to provide full recovery of IS.
The first phase of the process of ICT modernization was successfully realized in 2009.
Its part was also a consolidation of databases and infrastructural services.
In 2010 the second phase of the modernization process continued.
The modern secondary Datacentre at the level of Tier III (by Uptime Institute) with the emphasis on redundancy of key ICT components was built up from financial resources that the Office obtained.
The aim of this phase was to build up a second datacentre (VC II) in locality of the SOSR headquarters at Miletičova street in order to create couple of mutually substitutable datacentres togeth
er with the existing datacentre at Hanulova street (VC I).
The strategy of such systemization of datacentres is to provide highly available infrastructure of ICT to all centralized services of automated data processing of SOSR able to resist incidents up to the level of non-planned blackout of one of the centres.
Similarly as in VC I, modern virtualization technologies were implemented at each level, virtualization of servers and data storage, net components and also application servers was realized.
As in the ICT environment of SOSR did not exist any sophisticated tool providing administration of servers and working stations, appropriate solutions were searched to eliminate this shortage.
Microsoft Download Center
SCCM Distribution Point
SCCM Clients
This tool increase productivity and efficiency of IT by limiting hand processes and by using time to projects with higher value.
It maximizes usage of investments for hardware and software and promotes productivity of end users and also contributes to higher efficiency of the IT department by providing a comprehensive report of personal computers and mobile equipments by centralized methods.
New technologies required also higher demands on net technologies.
The Office accessed also to enlargement of monitoring systems of ICT operation from portfolio of HP OpenView by systems OVO, NNM and SE in 2010.
The IT department of SOSR fulfilled its objective to build up the monitoring cross-sectional system over important ICT components by this implementation.
The introduction of this monitoring system should increase availability of ICT services, shortening time of service actions, increase of the level of ICT security and last but not least obtaining documents for capacity planning of maintenance and development of ICT.
Monitoring servers
Monitoring equipments
44 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
The budget was adjusted by fourteen budgetary measures to EUR 35 195 517 in the course of 2010.
EUR 2 459 144 for PHC 2011 and transfer of resources budgeted to elections from capital expenditures to current ones.
Under the Decision of the Government of the SR relating to the saving measures for the 2nd half of 2010 SOSR current expenditures were bound in the amount of EUR 315 000 in total.
Incomes of the chapter approved in the amount of EUR 225 388 were decreased to EUR 197 388 by the above mentioned budgetary measure.
Real incomes amounted to EUR 1 358 550, including non-fiscal EUR 199 832 and non-budgetary from external grants EUR 1 158 718.
They were provided by the European Commission in order to introduce new statistical surveys.
Lower spending related to resources budgeted to PHC caused by approval of saving measures and lower prices of goods and services reached in the process of the public procurement against previous assumptions.
The special types of expenditures of the total expenditures were in the amount of EUR 17 974 898 (PHC EUR 6 869 270, the elections to the National Council of SR, the elections to bodies of municipal self-government and referendum in total EUR 4 113 574; building of a secondary workplace of information and technological station of SOSR EUR 6 992 054).
Expenditures on wages and insurance represented 73,3 %, goods and services 16,4 %, current transfers 9,3 % and capital expenditures 1 % of the rest of expenditures in the amount of EUR 16 820 406 spent on the common statistical activity.
Expenditures on wages were realized in the amount of EUR 9 031 965 and related contributions to insurance companies in the amount of EUR 3 294 208.
Expenditures on energies, protection of buildings, maintenance of technologies and buildings and operation of motor vehicles represented a considerable part.
Current transfers were spent in the amount of EUR 1 563 227, of which EUR 1 251 718 was spent on budgetary organizations INFOSTAT to deal with tasks specified in contracts.
Other transfers were used on severance pay and medical benefits.
Capital expenditures in the amount of EUR 165 789 were spent on reconstruction of buildings of SOSR, purchase of software, special machines and equipment and motor vehicles.
Special types of expenditures
Population and Housing Census 2011
EUR 6 869 270 were spent on preparatory activities relating to PHC, of which EUR 2 514 116 on goods and services and EUR 3 447 526 were capital expenditures.
A considerable part of expenditures on goods and services was spent on the computer technology purchase, information and communication technologies, information campaign, interior
46 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
equipment and overhead expenses.
Expenditures were spent mostly on overtime bonuses, bonuses and related contributions to insurance companies of employees participating in processing of results of elections and voting in referendum.
Expenditures on goods and services were spent on the material provision of professional summarizing units, the computer technology purchase, technical support services and on work contracts.
The other expenses in the amount of EUR 797 500 were transferred to Infostat that technically and technologically provided a preparation and processing of results of elections and referendum.
Capital expenditures in the amount of EUR 429 715 were spent on the purchase of software, operation machines and equipment and communication infrastructure.
The Ministry of Finance of the SR increased the limit of expenditures by EUR 7 000 000 by budgetary measure in order to build up a secondary workplace of information and technological station of the statistical office.
These resources were spent on purchase of software, computer technology, operation machines and equipment, reconstruction of spaces and computer technology, computer and connecting nets.
The priority over next period will be a development of the quality management system of SOSR in order to promote increasing efficiency of its activities as larger as possible.
The area of monitoring efficiency and gradual creation of the Office controlling will pay attention to introduction of the system on monitoring worked hours into routine operation in all departments of SOSR.
It will create conditions for further increase of management efficiency by optimization of usage of human resources.
A decrease of burden and costs resulting from duty to provide statistical information will continue together with optimization of value-creation process; it is not only an ambition of the national statistics, but also of the whole European Statistical System.
The priority to 2012 will be continuing optimization of statistical surveys and reduction of statistical burden of respondent and producer.
New approaches to modelling time series allowing to decrease survey periodicity of some indicators will be introduced to statistical processing.
New possibilities of usage of administrative data sources as a substitute of statistical surveys will be examined.
Strictly and consistent evaluation and provision of quality of statistical outputs have to be developed hand in hand with a decrease of response burden and costs on statistical surveys.
It means improvement of methodology of statistical estimates to reduce range and to change structure of samples.
Creation of an
application on so called calibration of weights in statistical software can be mentioned as an example of activities in this direction.
The significant task will be a cooperation in the development of the statistical information system.
Except the implementation of new mathematical and statistical methods, a consolidation and harmonization of metadata as a logical part of the continuing consolidation of data basis and project works relating to the national project Electronic services of SOSR will continue.
This activity covers structural metadata (codes and variables).
The activity to 2012 is to cover data disseminated by the Office by reference metadata, but implementing of the standard on exchange of statistical information SDMX (Statistical Data and Metadata Exchange) and the European standard for reference metadata will be taken into consideration.
In this connection SOSR will also participate in monitoring of national systems of metadata, which provides Eurostat in order to motivate their improving.
The priority of methodological activity will be a development and legislative issue of the national classification of occupations fully harmonized with prepared international standard classification of occupations ISCED 2011.
48 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
In 2011 additionally to standard activities relating to the compilation of annual accounts for 2010 and quarterly accounts (4th quarter of 2010 and first three quarters of 2011), attention of the field of national accounts will be paid to activities focused on improving the quality of data basis for compilation of national accounts.
Other activities will be focused on a preparation of compilation of the order of national accounts at quarterly level to all sectors of the economy.
The activities on a preparation of transformation matrices will finish in order to provide implementation of the classification SK NACE Rev. 2 to national accounts in compliance with the newly-approved implementing regulation.
In 2011, Eurostat will realize dialog mission to problems of procedure of over-deficit and debt and also control mission to problems of VAT questionnaires at Slovakia and therefore it will be necessary to pay increased attention and also human capacities for careful preparation of documents for both control visits.
We also approach the revision of weight schemes to calculate selected indices of prices of production statistics.
The key task of external trade statistics will be to increase the quality of data provided to reporting units.
In order to achieve this, working meetings are planned mostly with important reporting units.
Workshops for reporting units will continue because this form of obtaining information is very favoured.
The activities relating to modernization of methods will continue in business statistics to provide inputs and also outputs of the statistical information system in 2011.
The process of optimization of statistical surveys will also continue in order to decrease response burden and in connection to the Programme of modernization of business and trade statistics MEETS, gradual implementation of new methods aimed at a decrease of response burden of reporting units by broader usage of administrative data sources, implementation
of more sophisticated methods and tools, by multiple and effective usage of surveyed data in information and publication system of the statistical office will continue.
Statistics of foreign affiliations will be focused mostly on implementation of the SK NACE Rev. 2 structure in datasets on foreign affiliations and double compilation of datasets on reference year 2009.
The priority of structural business statistics will be a preparation of the quality report in compliance with the new regulation of the European Commission and improvement of the comparability with other relevant statistical areas.
The activities of the environment field will be aimed at a development of tax account relating to environment, an improvement of the quality of compilation of material flow account and account of emission of pollutants in cooperation with the Slovak Hydro-meteorological Institute.
Realization of two sample surveys aimed at lifelong education, i.e. statistical survey on continuing vocational training survey (CVTS4) and adults education survey (AES) in households will be very important.
Attention will be paid to the extension of contents and forms of products accessible via Internet.
Professional capacity of employees, technical and technological possibilities of the Office will be better used in this way.
The implementation of the marketing strategic objective will require aiming at different target groups of users, intensifying communication between users and producers of statistics and developing customer oriented statistics on the base of acquired experiences and knowledge.
In order to meet requests of customers in statistics as better as possible, survey on satisfaction of users with products and services of SOSR will be realized over 2011.
Results of the survey will be reflected on improving the activities and processes in SOSR.
In the 1st half of 2011 it will be necessary to realize more than 10 public competitions on positions of the head employees in regard to realized change of the organization chart of the Office.
The important task, in which the Personnel Office participates, is implementation of the cost management started by monitoring of usage of worked hours at the whole Office since the 2nd half of 2011.
The prepared project plan in the field of education of employees of SOSR, which should be financed from the European Social Fund, is an occasion.
We suppose that about 800 employees will take part in educational activities of the project.
The project will be aimed at an improvement of managerial competences, social and psychological skills of employees, professional statistical education and language preparation.
Educational activities, which will be realized in the project, take into consideration educational demands relating to optimization of processes in SOSR.
52 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
Methodology and Informatics Section
Department of Comprehensive Methodology
National Accounts Department
Price Statistics Department
External Trade
Department of Production Statistics
Department of Agricultural and Environment Statistics
Department of Market Services Statistics
Department of Projecting and Programming
Department of Information Technology
Macroeconomic Statistics Section
Business Statistics Section
Department of Comprehensive Analyses and Information
Department of European
Affairs and ntemational
Co-operation
Department of Crisis Management, IT Security, and Classified Information
Department of Strategy and Integrated Managment System
President's Office
Organizational structure 2010
Department of Population Statistics
Department of Labour and Wages Statistics
Department of Social Statistics
Social Statistics and Demography Section
Regional workplace Bratislava
Regional workplace Banská Byslrica
Regional workplace Prešov
Department of Office Service
Department of Economic Affairs
Personal Office
Vice-President
Head of Civil Service Office
Civil Service Office Secretariat
54 Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR 2010
Contacts
Phone: +421-2-50236 474
Content
Obsah: Production of cost-optimal database
Information systems and information and communication technologies
Priorities of 2012
Organizational structure 2011
In 2011, the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (SOSR) realized several significant statistical surveys influencing the whole activity of the Office in this year.
One of the most significant statistical actions was Population and Housing Census.
Except SOSR, municipal self-government and other state administration bodies were also interested in the census realization.
The Census was realized by traditional form as a general-purpose statistical survey, new forms of territorial preparation were used and for the first time inhabitants could use also electronic form of the census.
SOSR provided a coordination of involved subjects in the process of the census preparation, the census territorial preparation in full range, processed the methodology and defined the surveyed data content.
It provided printing and distribution of census forms, prepared organizational and legislative conditions to realize the census and realized collection and the surveyed data record in the census.
The Office will publish the first results in 2012.
The Office realized the other significant statistical survey - Farm Structure Survey 2010
(FSS) being a part of the European-wide project of agricultural statistics managed by the Statistical Office of the European UnionEUROSTAT.
The objective of the Farm Structure Survey was to provide comprehensive data on the Slovak agriculture in compliance with the requirements of the European Union (EU).
The Farm Structure Survey realization was very demanding task including addressing all subjects producing agricultural products without exception, whether it was market production or production for self-supply.
The file compiled for this survey represented the Slovak Republic including 98 % of used agricultural area and 98 % of the total number of livestock units.
FSS was aimed at surveying basic indicators (for example structure of used agricultural area, livestock, labour forces on farms), but also at surveying specific indicators required to assess an influence of the agriculture on environment and country.
In November 2011, the Office released preliminary data presenting basic information on agriculture in the Slovak Republic on its website.
Comprehensive data will be published continuously after validation by EUROSTAT in 2012.
In addition to standard works on compilation of annual accounts for 2010 and quarterly accounts, the National Account Department paid attention to transformation of sector data within implementation of the classification SK NACE Rev. 2 to national accounts by the implementing regulation effective from 2011 for the national accounts.
In the 1st quarter of 2011, EUROSTAT conducted a dialog mission to the problems of procedure of an excessive deficit and debt and also a control mission to problems of VAT statements in Slovakia.
New statistical tasks required increased attention resulted from the missions.
Very important task was the preparation of new regulation to revised system of ESA95, which should be effective from 2014 and SOSR
is participating actively in this process by its experts.
Legislative action was realized on the level of working group of the EU Council during the whole year 2011 and will continue also in 2012.
In 2011, price statistics realized revision of weight schemes of calculation of industrial producer price index and especial survey connected with the revision of weight schemes of calculation of construction work price index.
The EUROSTAT project on calculation of real estate price indices and price indices of goods and services relating to owner-occupied housing was successfully realized.
Harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) with constant taxes was provided monthly to EUROSTAT.
The consumer price pilot survey of selected goods and services was conducted in order to harmonize methodologies of the consumer price survey for calculation of HICP and for the European Comparison Programme in June 2011.
purchasing power parity were realized.
All tasks required by EUROSTAT were conducted by the division of preparation of documents for compilation of purchasing power parities.
In 2011, the External Trade Statistics Department provided standardly data processing of foreign trade statistics (FT), it tried to increase the quality of processed data and to increase statistical knowledge of reporting units.
Policy of statistical data dissemination was realized by the Office in compliance with the strategic aim to provide high-quality and objective statistical products and services and to promote increasing knowledge level of customers.
One of the main activity towards public was Open Door Day at the headquarters and workplaces of SOSR in regional towns, where information from different statistical domains were provided to interested persons and results of statistical works were presented.
In 2011, the Office realized the regular survey on satisfaction of users with products and services of SOSR via an on-line questionnaire.
Compared with 2009, a slight increase of the total satisfaction rate of users was recorded.
Results of the survey will be taking into consideration in preparation of products and forms of their dissemination, but also in improvement of other activities of the Office.
Main activities:
Title:
Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic
Address of headquarter: Miletičova 3, 824 67 Bratislava 26, Slovak Republic Contact:
telephone (operator) Internet
The Statistical Office is a budgetary organization, with its incomes and expenditures being a part of the state budget of the Slovak Republic
Identification of organization
A decrease of response burden in terms of respondent and also of producer is not only the strategic priority of SOSR to 2012 but also the ambition of the whole European Statistical System.
Together with a decrease of cost on statistical surveys, it is necessary to provide and assess consistently the quality of statistical outputs.
It means an introduction of new approaches and procedures to processes of statistical processing that allow decreasing a periodicity of surveying some indicators or some indicators will be excluded from a survey and allow replacing them by modelling in order to keep the quality of statistical outputs or even to increase this quality.
Important tool of increasing the quality of statistical outputs under parallel decreasing costs and response burden is usage of already existing administrative data sources.
An example of their effective usage is the new form of processing of the survey ROČ 3-01 for the reference period 2010, which was realized by data integration from different sources for the first time.
The result of new processing is a complete database of micro-data for the whole group of the self-employed.
It is necessary to
underline that realization of this processing did not mean any additional costs of SOSR.
The possibility of introduction of modelling and prognosticating of time series by ARIMAX models to the process of statistical processing was successfully tested within an optimization of the short-term reporting system in cooperation with INFOSTAT.
Selected time series from the survey P13-04 - Quarterly survey of production branches in small enterprises will be in the process of statistical processing modelled and then their development will be prognosticated in order to adjust results on the base of annual data.
The proposed methodology was verified first in historical data and based on results a procedure for practise was suggested.
The significant task was also cooperation on development of statistical information system in the field of implementation of modern mathematical and statistical methods to the proposal process and mostly to processing of statistical survey, in the field of quality evaluation of statistical outputs and in the field of statistical confidential data protection.
Activities realized during 2011 were focused on the development of statistical classifications and codes and on providing their harmonization with the European and international norms and standards.
After finishing the implementation of the international standard classification of occupations ISCO-08 to the statistical information
system, the process of development of the national version of this classification started in order to use it effectively not only for statistical purposes but also for purposes of domestic services of employment and services aimed at clients.
In 2011, the methodological assistance was continuously provided to the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR in order to apply the classification of occupations within the project of Integrated System of Type Positions and to the Ministry of Finance of the SR in order to coordinate application of the economic classifications SK NACE Rev.2 and CPA 2008 for tax purposes.
Priority of the statistical registers was to standardize processes relating to exchange, consolidation and integration of data on groups of enterprises in the EuroGroups Register of enterprises (EGR), administrator of which is Eurostat.
In March 2011, activities on production of EGR population for 2009 were finished, there were integrated together 3 368 enterprises with the seat in the territory of the SR within 8 185 global groups of enterprises.
SOSR started to realize another cycle of data exchange relating to EGR production for 2010 in July 2011.
To monitor progress of activities included in the EU Strategy 2020, indicators on rapidly growing innovative enterprises in the SR for 2007-2010 were provided to the European Commission in September 2011.
Calculation of required indicators was realized by the common methodology of EUROSTAT and OECD from data registered in the statistical organization register and in other administrative sources.
Because of very short data delivery of required indicators, new methods of imputation of data on number of employees in small enterprises based on administrative data provided for this purpose in special amount from the tax information system were applied in order to calculate them.
Production of cost-optimal database
The Section applies principles of cooperation with interested departments in database preparation in order to increase the data quality and consistency aimed at decreasing administrative response burden and costs of the Office.
The Section sets methods of database production, processes the Programme of State Statistical Surveys and provides issuing of it by the form of legislative regulation, coordinates preparation of statistical forms, metadata and data processing from technical and also organizational point of view and decides on releasing data to internal customers.
It coordinates retrieval and usage of administrative data sources (ADS), communicates with administrators of ADS and prepares proposals of data providing contracts.
It organizes realization of methodological and instructing visits of significant reporting units, provides consultancies in the field of database production, re-evaluate applied methods in terms of decreasing response burden and costs of statistical surveys.
A decrease of response burden in terms of both, respondent and producer is the strategic priority of SOSR to 2012.
The response burden by number of items (NI) decreased year-on-year (2010 to 2009) by 15,50 % and compared with 2008 it was down by 34,33 %, it means that the objective to decrease response burden to 2012 by 25 % was met already in 2010.
The number of items in questionnaires decreased also year-on-year (2010 to 2009), i.e. by 3,74 % and compared with 2008, there was a 24,46 % fall.
Statistical surveys were evaluated by 3 circles of reporting units: enterprises and entrepreneurs, households and public administration.
In 2010, the most significant decrease of NI was again in statistics on enterprises and entrepreneurs.
This burden decreased year-onyear (2010 to 2009) by 24,76 %, compared with 2008 there is a 46,05 % decrease.
NI of public administration increased year-on-year by 6,90 %, compared with 2008 there is recorded a 16,18 % decrease.
NI of households increased slightly year-on-year by 4,34 %, compared with 2008 by 6,56 %.
This increase reacts mostly on increasing requirements to measure objectives of sustainable development strategies.
All factors identified in order to meet the action programme of SOSR strategy affected a decrease of NI: reduction of number of items in questionnaires, periodicity modification of reporting of some modules and re-evaluation of criterion for sample surveys having an option to use mathematical and statistical methods on data estimation.
The average questionnaire completion time calculated as a sum of average times in minutes for all evaluated questionnaire decreased between 2008 and 2010 by 13,7 %.
Connections relating mostly to decrease of the number of items in questionnaires were searched in the data evaluation.
It showed that in most cases there is a direct influence on time needed by reporting units to complete a questionnaire.
Because the range of a questionnaire is only one of the factors influencing the length of questionnaire completion, SOSR will also continue dealing with other relevant aspects.
Currently, it relates to the continuing national project Electronic services of SOSR, i.e. im
provement of a design of statistical questionnaire and usage of new components making easier completion of paper questionnaire and increasing a comfort of electronic data providing.
Analysis of costs on statistical surveys (importance on collection and processing) showed that costs on statistical surveys are decreasing year-on-year.
The share of costs on statistical surveys in total costs on activities between 2006 and 2010 decreased from 59,2 % to 54,1 %.
Harmonization of national statistics within the European statistical system was conducted by transposing the legal acts of the European Community and EU also in 2011.
In 2011 based on these facts SOSR released the decree issuing the Program of State Statistical Surveys
Number of items of enterprises and entrepreneurs, population and public administration
Enterprises and entrepreneurs
Households
Number of items 2009
Number of items 2010
o ss s sehoolds olds ld
min nisstraat r io ion iion
Two new one-shot European surveys conducting by SOSR were included in the program of surveys: SASU 1-01 Survey on safety and criminality and GVC 1-01 One-shot survey on global production of value.
Attention was put mostly on continuing process of optimization of the reporting system in preparation of the Program of State Statistical Survey.
It was presented in such way that surveys conducted with more-year periodicity: two-year, three-year and five-year were included in new three-year program.
SOSR will realized eight surveys with more-year periodicity, ministries and state organizations realize two such surveys.
SOSR has dealt more intensively with reporting system optimization since 2008.
Files of reporting units in sample surveys were optimized and possibilities of usage of administrative sources were analysed.
Data on non-surveyed groups of entrepreneurs acquired from administrative sources and on the base of statistical models will be in compliance with the European-wide trend.
National accounts comprise a compatible accounting framework for systematic and detailed description of the economy as well as individual sectors and subsectors, where all grades of economic process (production, creation and division of incomes, their usage, accumulation and financial transactions) are collected.
They are compiled by the methodology European System of National and Regional Accounts 1995 - ESA 95.
The development of the national account system in compliance with new regulation and directives of EU is one of the main objectives of the macro-economic statistics.
In 2011, final annual sector accounts for 2008, preliminary ones for 2009 and estimation of 2010 based on new and adjusted data were compiled.
Except standard adjustments because of acquiring new information, SOSR focused on adjustment of calculation of wages in the public administration sector, but this change influenced years 2006-2009.
Based on compiled annual data of national accounts, quarterly data of national accounts were also revised in November 2011.
This transformed data were delivered gradually by deadlines of transmission programme in time series 2000-2010 at current prices, at constant prices of the previous year and by chaining of volume indices to the reference year 2005 to EUROSTAT during 2011.
Flash GDP and employment estimate was provided regularly within 45 days after ending the reference quarter.
Quarterly data of national accounts were compiled by the Office fully in compliance with the ESA 95 transmission programme and were regularly released within 65 days after ending the reference period.
Data of quarterly national accounts are seasonally adjusted in accordance with regulations and directions of EU.
Data for the 1st quarter of 2012 were released and sent.
In 2011, SOSR calculated the compensation for small companies exempted from VAT for purposes of own sources flowing from VAT relied on the methodology prepared by EUROSTAT and in compliance with the requirement of the Ministry of Finance of the SR.
In the 1st quarter of 2011, EUROSTAT carried out a dialog mission to problems of Procedures of excessive deficit and debt in Slovakia and also a control mission to problems of VAT statements.
New statistical tasks required increased attention resulted from the missions.
In the 3rd quarter of 2011, EUROSTAT approved the long-term grant project on topic Methodological and technical improvement of national accounts, where SOSR cooperating with INFOSTAT will deal with project tasks aimed at quality improvement of annual and quarterly national accounts, shortening the deadlines of flash estimate of quarterly GDP, first estimates of key regional indicators and preparations of documents for calculation of pension obligations.
Grant project activities have started in December 2011 and their completing is assumed on June 2014.
Macro-economic statistics
Legislative action on the level of the EU Council working group has continued during the whole year 2011 and will continue also in 2012.
In 2011, price statistics realized weight scheme revision of calculation of industrial producer price index and was realized especial survey relating to the preparation of weight scheme revision of calculation of construction work price index.
The grant project of EUROSTAT relating to calculation of real estate price indices and price indices of
Note:
• current prices calculated by chaining volumes with use of reference year 2005
• data in graph for 20008 and 2009 are half-final data and data for 2010 are preliminary
Current annual data of GDP development in time series 1995 - 2010 in mil.
Eur
goods and services relating to owner-occupied housing was successfully finished.
SOSR also continued sending the Harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) with constant taxes to EUROSTAT in monthly periodicity.
The consumer price pilot survey of selected goods and services was conducted in order to harmonize methodology of the consumer price survey for calculation of HICP and for the European Comparison Program in June
GDP - year-on-year development increases (CPLY index - 100) in %
The most significant can be mentioned: calculation of GDP weights (volumes and prices) for purchasing power parity (PPP), price surveys of selected comparable goods, services, construction projects and investment units, surveys on wages in state administration and surveys of rental prices.
In 2011, data of the external trade statistics and their updating as well as indices of import and export prices were provided in compliance with required deadlines in monthly periodicity.
Initiatives of EUROSTAT leading to simplifying the INTRASTAT system continued.
Initiatives of EUROSTAT also continue, but their final result will not have an influence on the range of collected and provided data over the next period.
In 2011, data quality, implementation of amended legislation and recommendations of EUROSTAT and also cooperation with reporting units were of great importance, it re
• CPLY - corresponding period last year
• constant prices calculated by chaining of volumes with use of reference year 2005
GDP - constant prices calculated by chaining of volumes
sulted in many activities.
Comparisons of external trade data for 2009-2010 were realized in cooperation with the Czech Statistical Office, cooperation with register of aeroplanes started, methodology of data sending and processing from centralized declaring of process of active subtilizing regimes was solved.
Codes and also handbook for reporting units were updated in accordance with the effective legislation.
In order to increase information of reporting units on the INTRASTAT system, 5 workshops with 80 participants was provided during the year.
Workshops excepting the basic information on the INRASTAT system presented an overview on newest legislative changes, but mostly gave responses to specific tasks of participants.
Meetings with reporting units that had problems with quality and timeliness of data were realized and individual consultations were provided continuously by phone and electronically.
According to EUROSTAT decisions on INTRASTAT simplification, other analyses of possible impacts on data provided quality will be
firstly realized over the next period.
SOSR plans continuing in working meetings with key reporting units, where are problems with regular data providing on time and in organizing workshops for reporting units.
This form of providing information on the INTRASTAT system is the most requested.
The Business Statistics Section also aimed at development of individual statistics in compliance with new regulations and directives of EU in the last calendar year.
The centre of activities in business short-term statistics was aimed at meeting the deadlines of the first data transmission, i.e. one of the priorities of EUROSTAT and the European Central Bank.
SOSR was included in the first category of member countries with the best level of compatibility in the comprehensive evaluation of compatibility in accord with the regulation on short-term statistics.
Two questionnaires on method of compilation of building permit indicator and industrial import prices were prepared within the action plan of the quality of short-term statistics.
The Office took part actively in a discussion on proposal of package of changes for the field of short-term statistics in the phase of new conception preparation of legal framework to business statistics.
The annual structural statistics compiled sets of the final indicators for 2009 and transmitted them on time.
The procedure proposed in the project MEETS (Modernisation of European Enterprise and Trade Statistics) aimed at usage of administrative data sources in annual business statements was used in order to process sets of preliminary results for 2010 for the first time.
Data on tradesmen were included also in output sets.
Also in this area, SOSR was included in the first category of member states with the best level of compatibility with the regulation on structural statistics.
New structured reports on quality were prepared for both areas.
Business statistics continued realizing tasks focused on implementation of the European legislation, increasing the quality of input and outputs of the statistical system and extension of data availability in databases of SOSR and international institutions in the last calendar year.
Effort to decrease administrative demandingness and response burden continued.
Extent of surveyed indicators in short-term periodicity was again re-evaluated and some indicators with lower possibility of usage were excluded or moved to the surveys with annual periodicity.
International activities were focused on the realization of project activities aimed at increasing the harmonization of statistical surveys and improving the processing including used tools in cooperation with EUROSTAT and the European Commission.
Activities of the statistics of industry were focused on data analysis aimed at comparability and characterising of mutual relations of the development between short-term indicators in the last calendar year.
Based on requirement of EUROSTAT resulting from the working group, employees of the department of industrial statistics started dealing with a problem of realization of industrial production index calculation on the base of chain indices.
This task will also continue in the next pe
riod, while EUROSTAT plan to organize solving the task by working groups during 2012 as well.
Considering the fact that starting January 2013, a transition to new basic period for industrial production index calculation will be prepared in terms of product representatives or set up new weights for 2010, preparation works have begun at the end of 2011.
Activities of re-calculation of time series aimed at the subsequent analysis of re-calculated data to new basic year 2010 will continue.
Priorities of agricultural statistics were mostly providing the collection and processing of Farm Structure Census 2010 (FSC) that is realized in 10-year intervals.
This survey is a part of the European-wide project of the agricultural statistics managed by the Statistical Office of EU - EUROSTAT.
The Farm Structure Census realization was very demanding.
In the survey, there were addressed farms producing agricultural products, without exception whether it related to market production or to production for self-supply.
The file of addressed units had to represent the SR so that it contained 98 % of used agricultural area and 98 % of the total number
of livestock units.
22 420 households and 1 639 registered units with the economic activity in agriculture were included in the survey.
Registered units were addressed mostly by post and data collection in household was conducted by 1 015 interviewers.
FSC was especially aimed at surveying basic indicators, e.g. structure of used agricultural land, livestock, labour forces on farms, but also at surveying of specific indicators required for evaluation of an influence of agriculture on environment and country.
In November 2011, SOSR released preliminary data presenting basic information on agriculture in the Slovak Republic on the website.
Comprehensive data will be published after finishing the process of validation by EUROSTAT.
To improve the satisfaction of needs of internal and also external customers, a field of regularly released data on the SOSR's website was extended.
Great attention was paid further to improvement of methodology of inputs and outputs of the information system including searching possibilities of broader usage of administrative sources.
Methodological problems of reporting of surveyed indicators and also problems of statistical data collection and processing were solved directly by consultations with reporting units or in cooperation with responsible employees of regional workplaces of SOSR.
The main activities of the consumer barometer were aimed at data acquisition on mood, expectations and investment plans of inhabitants of Slovakia in the age group 16 and over.
Processed information on required indicators of the business surveys for the branch of industry, construction, retail trade, services, investment in industry and consumer barometer were regularly monthly delivered to the European Commission in accord with the timetables and were used on construction of confidence indicators in individual branches and on production of synthetic composite indicators, economic sen
number of dwelling
Dwelling construction
started built partially
completed
Business statistics
timent indicator (ESI) on national and also international level.
Development tasks aimed at updating balance tools and software products, broader usage of model solutions and mathematical and statistical methods to short-term prognosticating and prediction of next development were performed in cooperation with research area in business statistics.
INFOSTAT as a scientific and research workplace of SOSR used processed results of business surveys to realization of quarterly flash estimate of gross domestic product (GDP).
base capacity acquired by processing of data from monthly business surveys in business statistics, result of which is an experimental construction of leading indicator on potential turning points in the development of the Slovak economy.
In the field of statistics of science, technology and innovations, the Office took part in activities of EUROSTAT and OECD in order to increase the quality and international data comparability in compliance with international methodological manuals and standards.
From these activities, there was paid attention to further improvement of methodological procedures and surveyed data on research
Research and development expenditures by sectors realizing research and development (in thous.
capital
current
Business sector
Government (state) sector
Private non-profit sector
Tertiary sector
expenditures
and development, mostly in the tertiary sector in case of indicator of expenditures on research and development.
Representatives of SOSR actively participated in meeting of the working group of national experts on indicators of science and technology NESTI in OECD and in meetings of the working group of statistics of science, technology and innovations in EUROSTAT and provided completing of all monothematic, regular, methodological and also wide-ranging data questionnaires for these institutions.
Quality reports of statistics of research and development were prepared by standard criterion of quality evaluation for individual sectors providing research and development by usage of EUROSTAT electronic tool.
tions realized a wide-ranging survey on innovations by united questionnaire of EU supplemented by new types of indicators on usage of knowledge and skills.
Increased attention was paid to quality of surveyed data in the field of transport, information, communication and information society.
All surveys were realized in relevant areas in compliance with the regulations of EU including data transmissions to EUROSTAT databases, International Transport Forum,
Datasets, analytical reports and quality reports were prepared from relevant surveys by requirements of EUROSTAT.
Results of all surveys were provided to broad public within the publication system of the statistical office.
The system of data acquisition and processing to the account of material flows was introduced and completed questionnaire to this account was delivered to EUROSTAT.
Development of other two accounts included in this regulation, i.e. account of emissions to atmosphere and account of taxes relating to environment were of great importance.
In the last calendar year, the Office took part in realization of the grant project, the main objective of which was introduction of statistics of countryside development within SOSR.
The grant result was compilation and delivery of data and metadata for indicators of countryside development proposed by EUROSTAT.
Cooperation with international organizations
In April, the final two-week mission was held in the Statistical Agency of Tajikistan in Dushanbe.
The subject of the mission was analysis of experimental results of industrial production indices of Tajikistan and training aimed at work with application of the Slovak procedure of calculation of indices.
In the second half of the year, employees of the Industry Statistics Department provided their knowledge from the field of industrial statistics to a trainee from Bosnia and Herzegovina within the grant project of EUROSTAT.
Exchange of knowledge between statisticians of the neighbouring countries continued as well.
Group of science and research statistics organized a workshop to current and development tasks of science and research statistics at SOSR in October 2011.
The workshop with representatives of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Austria and Slovenia was assessed positively by participants.
In tourism statistics, SOSR took part in the project of the ESSnet group, aim of which is to examine the possibility of implementation of electronic data collection in form of XML directly from managerial information systems of accommodation facilities.
Standard monitoring of the development of the population number and structure continued in demographic statistics.
Information about the population development was provided and presented to users; possibilities of data acquisition from administrative sources were verified.
Information required by the European legislation obtained from administrative sources was methodically harmonized to develop the system of migration statistics and we participated in creation of Migration policy action plan of the SR.
ing Census 2011.
The census was conducted by traditional form as a general-purpose statistical survey; new forms of territorial preparation were used by its preparation and it was possible to use also electronic form of census for the first time.
SOSR provided coordination of involved subjects to prepare census, provided fully its territorial preparation, processed methodology and defined the content of surveyed data.
The Office conducted organizational and legislative conditions to the census realization, provided printing and distribution of counting form and collection and recording of census data surveyed.
Household accounts realized a collection of data on income and expenditures of private households in 2011.
Data are used to creation of social policy of the SR's government and
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centre
to analyses of living conditions of households.
Depersonalized microdata of 2010 were provided to external customers.
Data of the survey Family accounts 2010 were processed to the publication of Incomes, Expenditures and Consumption of Private Households of the SR 2010.
The next wave of the survey on incomes and living conditions of households (EU SILC 2011) was realized in the previous year, the survey is conducted on the base of international harmonized methodology of EUROSTAT.
Processed micro data and indicators were delivered to EUROSTAT.
Depersonalized microdata were provided also to external customers only for scientific and research purposes.
Data of the EU SILC survey were processed in two publications: EU SILC 2010 - Survey on Incomes and Living Conditions of Households in the SR and EU SILC 2010 - Indicators of Poverty and Social Exclusion.
Sample Survey was supplemented by an additional module focused on the employment of persons with long-term health problem in the 2nd quarter.
Standard obtaining of the information in households via paper questionnaires was supplemented by electronic questionnaires installed in portable equipment of computer technology (CAPI).
Transition to combined method of data collection will allow harmonizing processes on input of the survey with the European trends in social statistics.
Introduction of CAPI is a part of the national action plan in order to increase quality of this survey.
Wage statistics continued providing information on development of nominal and real wages needed also for calculation of other indicators in social area.
Basic quarterly information on wage development in economy of the SR was supplemented by detailed data on wage components, net wage, median wage and by distribution of employees by wage categories in annual basis.
Data on differences in remuneration by gender, age, education, occupation and workload had also high information value.
The most significant task of social statistics was to finish processing of the first European survey on health (EHIS 2009), to publish comprehensive publication on its results and also preparation and delivery of depersonalised database of data.
Data collection was realized within the statistical survey on continuing vocational training survey in enterprises (CVTS4) and also sample survey of households on education of adults (AES) was conducted.
SOSR provided statistical information on nonfinancial data on health care within the regu
lar common data collection of OECD, WHO and EUROSTAT to EUROSTAT and also to possible national users, data on accidents at work by the methodology of the European Statistics of Accidents at Works (ESAW) and data on occupational diseases on the base of the methodology of the European Occupational Diseases Statistics (EODS) for 2009.
Providing of quantitative and qualitative data on social protection for 2009 were realized in compliance with the legislation and methodology of ESSPROS and providing of qualitative and quantitative data on active and passive policy of labour market for 2009 were realized in compliance with the methodology of database of labour market politics.
Data on statistics of social protection, education, culture, crime, disability to work for
Growth indices of average monthly wage in the SR from the 1st quarter of 2005
real wage
corresponding period last year = 100
nominal wage
disease or accident, non-profit associations, compulsory social insurance and statistical data on health were provided systematically to relevant state institutions, international organizations and to public database.
SOSR provided statistical information on financial and non-financial data in health, data on occupational diseases, accidents at work and crime for 2009 to EUROSTAT.
Demographic Research Centre
Demographic Research Centre (DRC) dealt with 5 planned tasks based on the contract with SOSR in 2011.
DRC also prepared documents for publication Population Movement of the SR 2010 and documents for publishing the life tables to SOSR within planned tasks.
Development characteristics of the nubmer of population of the SR,
number of population
birth
death
migration balance
number of population (thous.)
birth/death/migration balance (thous.)
Control of meeting the tasks of DRC was realized quarterly.
All planned tasks of DRC were met in required dates, range and quality.
The task Rebalances of data of PHC 2011 to 1.1.2011 was moved to 2012.
Information on activity of DRC is published on the DRC's website www.infostat.sk/drc.
Additionally to planned tasks, employees of DRC were involved to deal with non-planned (current) tasks required by individual departments usually in the form of working documents, supporting documents, opinions and evaluations.
DRC continued developing the cooperation with domestic and non-domestic demographic institutions, very intensive was cooperation with the Faculty of Natural Sciences of UC.
Employees of DRC participated in writing of eleven articles to professional periodicals and wrote many reviews.
The participation in conferences included 6 active presentations abroad and 9 contributions in domestic conferences and workshops.
DRC has a representa
tion in editorial board of the periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography.
All employees of DRC are involved in the pedagogical process, present demography at faculties and universities (Faculty of Natural Sciences of UC, Pedagogic Faculty of UC, Social and Economic Sciences of UC and Slovak Medical University).
One employee finished doctorate study at Charles University in Prague.
Great attention was paid to communication on internet via own website as well as the website SLOVAKPOPIN, which is a result of cooperation with SOSR and which contains detailed demographic data.
The number of employees of DRC was decreased to five after one employee left to Demographic Institute in Wien.
In 2011, SOSR realized tasks relating to new election to bodies of municipal self-government (by-election to bodies of municipal (local) council and city council) at the election statistics department.
The first election was held on 12th March of 2011 in 21 municipalities.
17 expert (summarizing) departments for district election commissions and expert (summarizing) department for the Central Election Commission were created.
The second election was declared by the NC of the SR on 25th June 2011.
SOSR realized processing of results in 19 municipalities.
Municipalities delivered a report with results to 16 district election commissions.
Another processing of results of new election to bodies of municipal self-government was realized by SOSR on 5th November 2011 in 14 municipalities.
SOSR created expert (summarizing) departments that processed results of election on own level for all district election commissions and also for the Central Election Commission.
Employees of workplaces of SOSR from regional cities of the SR participated largely to meet all tasks at the election statistics department.
The Institute of Informatics and Statistics (INFOSTAT) cooperates as usual with the Statistical Office to deal with research and development tasks of the national statistics yearly.
The cooperation is based on the contract and annexes concluded by both organizations for a relevant year and it is aimed at the priority statistical activities of the Office.
 methodological solutions - of support to application of dynamic regression of time series; satellite account in tourism; problems of analysis and modelling time series; usage of statistical data from short-term surveys; problems of business statistics; new method of survey of incomes and ex
penditures of private households in statistics of household accounts,
 updating and development - of APV and database of Urban and Municipal Statistics (UMS) and Urban Information System (UIS); software for VZCD, business surveys and balancing energy;
The 2011 activity of INFOSTAT is completely documented in a special report available on the Office's website www.statistics.sk, in part About us/Key documents/Annual Reports.
SOSR continued realizing action programmes to meet strategic objectives in the field of providing services to customers.
Activities aimed at satisfaction of needs and expectations of statistical users were realized as fully as possible based on the approved Marketing Plan of SOSR for 2011.
Attention was paid to meeting requirements defined in portfolio of products that the Statistical Office provided to domestic and foreign customers.
Regarding domestic customers, there were especially legislative and executive bodies of the state administration, such as the National Bank of Slovakia, the Ministry of Finance of the SR, the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR and the Ministry of Economy of the SR.
160 datasets were provided to the Slovak institutions together in different periodicity.
Obtained statistical information was used for management and decision making processes.
Meeting requirements of international and intergovernmental organizations was realized mostly for EUROSTAT, Organization for European Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), Economic and Financial Affairs Committee of the European Commission (ECFIN), International Labour Organization (ILO), and International Energy Agency (IEA).
261 products in the form of different questionnaires, datasets and tables of all statistical domains were provided them in 2011, 80 % of them was delivered to EUROSTAT.
Marketing activities were aimed also at understanding and increasing of customer knowl
edge in the field of statistics.
Professional departments at headquarters and workplaces of SOSR in regions organized many working meetings, forums and personal discussions with key customers focused on discover their expectations, on support of better interpretation and usage of statistical products.
SOSR realized 50 marketing activities for external users with participation of more than 2000 customers during the year.
The most significant activity of the year was Open Door Day organized in order to increase public knowledge of the official statistics mission and tasks.
This action gave a chance to interested persons to be acquainted with work and products of SOSR directly at the headquarters and in individual workplaces of SOSR in regions.
Visitors could obtain information from different statistical fields, i.e. on production and organization of surveys, on dissemination of statistical information and also on retrievals from the Organization Register.
They could try out work with on-line databases of SOSR and EUROSTAT, they could see new computer centre of SOSR.
On the occasion of Open Door Day the Office issued presentation and information documents aimed at different statistical topics.
All realized activities were a contribution to acquire feedback on needs and expectations of customers, but also an occasion to present work of statisticians and to explain its importance for society.
SOSR provided statistical information from different thematic areas via information service.
In 2011, 6 899 requests together were met by the Office, of which 3 528 were met at the headquarters and 3 371 were met in workplaces in regions.
6 392 of the total number of requests were for domestic statistical users and
507 for external subjects, of which 95 % were met at headquarters of SOSR.
Besides this, considerable number of requests was met by phone or by personal visit of a customer.
The most requests were registered from students and teachers (32,9 %), from customers, such as enterprises, associations, fields (22,7 %) and from broad public (15,8 %) at headquarters of the Office during the year.
The highest interest was in information on demography and social statistics (34 %).
In the last year, public database SLOVSTAT available on the Office's website was intensively used by the professional and laic public.
10 114 registered users visited the database in total and 152 588 data extractions were realized from 901 tables.
Users were interested mostly in indicators from statistical domains, such as labour market and wages, quarterly
national accounts, prices, demographic statistics and incomes, expenditures and consumption of households.
The most extractions were made by students (almost one half) and by users from business, science and research sector (almost one quarter).
59 822 users visited the regional database RegDat last year, they realized 80 567 visits and 548 900 data extractions from 250 data matrices.
Users were interested most in statistical regional data on demography, labour market and social statistics.
The Office realizes the survey focused on surveying satisfaction of customers with products and services of the Office with two
Number of met requests by topics
Demography and social statistics
Statistics relating to many areas
Banking, finances, prices
Business statistics
Statistical infrastructure
Average satisfaction rate of respondents (in points)
Average satisfaction rate with products and informationa services of SOSR (in points)
average satisfaction rate of respondents
average satisfaction rate with a product or a service
average satisfaction rate relating to a complete question
science, research, education
SLOVSTAT database
RegDat database
st. administration, self-government, public institutions
other databases
information reports
associations, unions, non-profit organizations
publications
information on request
enterprises, entrepreneurs
consultation services
financial and bank institutions
year periodicity in accord with the Development Strategy of SOSR to 2012.
In 2011, satisfaction survey was realized via on-line questionnaire.
1 558 questionnaires was included in statistical processing.
The most numerous group of respondents was students (34 %) and representatives of state administration and self-government (almost 20 %).
More than one half of respondents used statistical information for school and study documents.
Respondents evaluated 36 items in five areas of questions, in which they have an opportunity to express satisfaction or dissatisfaction for example with concrete products, level of services, databases, availability and timeliness of searched information, understandability of methodological notes, level of website and products of statistical domains.
The analysis of results showed that the total average satisfaction rate with statistical products and services of SOSR reached 74 points, i.e. a slight improvement (by 1,5 point) compared with the survey in 2009.
The best evaluation (similarly than in 2009) was achieved in services of employees of the Office.
Respondents evaluated by the highest average satisfaction rate (from 82,5 to 87,4 points) helpfulness and willingness of employees and information on request, also quickness of meeting requirements, professionalism of employees, level of advisory and consultancy services.
Lower satisfaction of respondents in evaluation of some areas pointed out reserves of SOSR in providing products and services.
It relates mostly to Office's website (clarity and user conformability), content of databases, comparability, availability and providing statistical information on time and also understandability of methodological notes.
Obtained information and comments of respondents brought valu
able inputs, which will be taking into consideration in production and dissemination of products and services of the Office.
One of the main objectives defined in the Office's strategy is to increase systematically the institution value for interested parties and its recognition on national and international level.
The Office monitors fulfilling of this objective also via the credibility indicator of the Statistical Office of the SR.
In 2011, SOSR realized the credibility survey through external independent organization on a representative sample of 1 017 inhabitants of the SR in the age group over 18 years.
The survey results showed that 61 % of respondents expressed a confidence to SOSR.
Compared with 2010, the total confidence of the public to SOSR increased by 7 percentage points.
Statistical publications were continuously issued in printing and also in electronic form based on the Catalogue of Publications 2011.
SOSR issued together 86 titles in monthly, quarterly and annual periodicity, of which 64 titles at the headquarters and 22 in regional workplaces.
More than three quarter of the total number of publications was available on the Office's website.
The main comprehensive and sector publications are Statistical Yearbook of the SR 2011, Statistical Yearbook of Regions of Slovakia 2011, yearbooks of industry, construction, foreign trade, transport, posts and telecommunications, yearbook of science and technology and quarterly Statistical Report on Basic Development Tendencies in the SR.
The Office issued presentation publication based on application of new conceptual plans in production of statistical products: Slovak Republic in figures 2011, Regions in
Comprehensive overview of statistical information characterizing role of women and men in current society was presented in the electronic publication Gender equality 2011.
Titles Age structure of population of the Banská Bystrica region 2005-2010, Population in the Nitra region and Agriculture in the Nitra region were issued out of the Catalogue of Publication.
In the field of providing services, the Office was involved in the international activity realized within the EUROSTAT grant project European Statistical Data Support (ESDS) relating to support of users interested in European statistics.
In 2011, the Office conducted activities of this area on the base of the gentleman
agreement with EUROSTAT.
The European Statistical Data Support Centre working at the Statistical Office (hereafter called Centre) gave assistance to navigation of users on the website of EUROSTAT, to searching the European statistical data in databases of EUROSTAT, and also to answering methodological questions.
In order to promote European statistics, SOSR continued updating information available in the part European Statistics on the Office's website and released the propagation leaflet on EUROSTAT, on information disseminated on its website and services provided to users by the Centre.
In 2011, SOSR supplemented the offer in part Services by the part European Statistical System and also displayed selected continuously updated tables from European statistics in the Slovak language on its website.
The Office met the EUROSTAT requirement, i.e. to release information on the European Statistical System and also the most requested data of the European statistics on the websites of the national statistical offices.
In 2011, the rest numbers of the volume 2010 that we finished and the first three numbers of the volume 2011 and also especial number of the periodical to 20th anniversary of establishing this periodical were issued.
Scientific and also informative articles of SOSR experts and also professionals mostly from universities and research and scientific workplaces were presented.
The Office is a part of the European Statistical system (ESS) and its international activities are developed in compliance with priorities of European statistics.
In 2011, the activity of ESS was aimed mostly at preparation and gradual adoption of measures to fulfill the strategy presented in the document COM (2009) 404 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the production method of EU statistics (a vision for the next decade) and in the document COM (2011) 211 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council - Towards robust quality management for European statistics.
Discussion were focused mostly on strengthening the management and professional independence of the statistics, possibilities of other standardization and increasing the quality of statistics in connection with financial and economic crisis.
The Office took part actively in preparation and adoption of new European legislation in the field of statistics.
In 2011, three new framework regulations of EP and of the Council were approved: the Regulation of EP and of the
The Office organized many events with international participation.
In October, the workshop relating to science and research statistics realized within the neighbouring cooperation was realized at the Office, participants of which were representatives from the Czech, Hungary, Austria and Slovenia.
Other external business trips were bilateral meetings (mostly to the Czech Republic), trainings that were attended by the Office's employees as learners within the European education program, mis
sions, where Office's experts worked as lectors, workshops realized within the ESSnet projects or grant projects assigned to the Office, workshops and conferences organized by OECD and other international organizations (UN, ECB, IMF and the like).
Employees of the Office dealt with 31 grant
The number of participants of external business trips by purpose:
Council Grants
International activities
The project Strengthening of the statistical system of Tajikistan financed by the World Bank was successfully finished after five-year implementation in the field of technical assistance.
Work of 11 experts of the Office in the field of social statistics, national accounts, statistics of industry, transport and population census was highly appreciated not only by the beneficiary, but also by the head of the international consortium, the Statistical Office of Germany.
Representatives of the Office realized also the mission to Azerbaijan relating to implementation of the quality management system in the statistical office.
In the second half year, an employee of Bosnia and Herzegovina attended the four-month traineeship aimed at statistics of industry.
989,7 employees (the average registered recalculated number) was employed in SOSR, of which 327,2 employees at the headquarter and 662,5 employees at the workplaces of SOSR in regions in 2011.
After saving measures realized to 31th December of 2010 and to 31th January 2011, the planned number of posts of the Office decreased by 102 compared with the previous year.
In spite of the unfavourable initial situation relating to a number of posts
and volume of wage resources, all tasks of the Office were performed by staff.
The significant priority of the management of human resources was personnel coverage of specific tasks of Population and Housing Census, for which 100 posts were reserved.
Education and age structure of employees of the Office to the 31th December 2011 are depicted in the graphs.
primary 0,4% secondary without A levels 2,5%
full secondary with A levels 43,9%
tertiary I. level 2,4%
77,7 % women and 22,3 % men were employed in the Office.
From the total number of 134 head employees, 69 % represented women and 21 % accounted for men.
The education activities approved in the Education Plan of Employees for 2011 were realized in the field of education of employees; this activities were supplemented by another professional workshops and trainings result
ing from operative requests of individual departments and needs of employees during the year.
Last year, the education of employees of the Office was aimed mostly at:
 increasing professional knowledge and skills  development of skills to use information
41 - 50 years 27,7 %
over 60 years 8,0 %
under 30 years 10,3 %
31 - 40 years 15,4 %
51 - 60 years 38,6 %
Following trainings were realized in managerial preparation and increase of professional performance of employees: Effective manager (the training containing four follow-up modules), Couching, Media training, Training of effective communications with customers and Conflict resolution and nonverbal communication.
Trainings attending by 162 head employees, personal capacities and other specialists developed abilities of employees in order to react flexibly on changing internal and external environment of the Office.
Professional education and education in the field of information and communication technologies related to realization of key activities in 2011.
The education aimed at preparation, realization and processing of the results of Population and Housing Census was mostly of great importance.
The education focused on increasing professional knowledge and skills of specialists in the field of statistics had a particular status in professional education.
and others), the education programme Schola Statistica was also realized, it consists not only of the training for new employees, or employees with minimal professional practice, but also of other professional trainings taking into consideration educational needs of individual departments of the Office and 69 employees took part in it.
75 employees of the Office took part in 51 professional education events on international level.
The objective of trainings was to increase required knowledge and skills in the field of European statistics, to participate in knowledge exchange and to provide important information on the ESS.
Other employees of the Office participated in education as well, i.e. by their professional specification (e.g. legislation, management of human resources, wages, economics and operation, public procurement and others).
in the field of information and communication technologies.
219 employees took part in language preparation in half-intensive and intensive trainings of English and French language.
Employees took part in 784 education activities in 2011.
Except standard education forms, 841 self-education of different professional specification was recorded, 507 self-education in statistical domains, 218 self-education in the field of information and communication technologies and 10 self-education was connected with increase the quality of language skills.
The amount of financial resources that the Office spent on education was EUR 44 478 last year.
Library of SOSR provided its services to 2 562 readers (of which 1 953 were external visitors and 609 employees of the Office).
4 665 borrowings were registered in the library during the year.
57 titles of daily press and periodicals were registered continuously.
EUR 9 207 was spent to purchase professional literature, subscription of daily press and periodicals in financial statement.
The most significant event of SOSR was Population and Housing Census in 2011.
In this year, the Office provided information system by a supplier, it allows also electronic census for the first time.
This possibility was used by 6,73 % of inhabitants.
Except the system of electronic data collection from inhabitants, application programme equipment on preparation activities to support realization of PHC 2011 (electronic formation of counting districts) and also application programme equipment on further census data processing were created.
In the context of the Programme of State Statistical Surveys, electronic data collection available for reporting units on the SOSR's website was used by averagely 3 494 (22,6 %) respondents of the total average number of 15 498 addressed reporting units in monthly periodicity and averagely 2 229 (22,7 %) respondents of the total average number of 9 805 addressed reporting units in quarterly periodicity.
In 2011, electronic data collection contributed to a decrease of administrative burden of reporting units that is planned by SOSR in all surveys within the realized phase of the national project of Electronic Services for 2012.
The Office moved to the realization phase of the project based on signed contract on providing of non-repayable financial contribution to the project of Electronic services of SOSR and after successful public procurement and signing up the contract with a supplier on realization of the project in 2010 in the field of information system development.
The project objective is introduction of high-quality electronic services customer- and entrepreneur
oriented in the SR by increasing the quality, information value, accessibility and clarity of statistical data.
The project is aimed also at decrease of excessive response burden during statistical surveys by introduction of the principle “one time and no more”.
It relates to elimination of duplicate data acquisition that is available in information systems of public administration.
SOSR will acquire these data from bodies of public administration included in the national statistical system.
Information system will be based on newest technologies and will provide more levels of tools for a work with data to a user.
On one hand the portal will allow an access to the statistical tables classified by subject areas.
A tool that allows monitoring data in hierarchical structures by subject areas, time or geographic presentation will be at disposal.
In case of user interest, there will be available also an online analytical tool allowing application of basic statistical methods, production of own report, or its graphic representation.
In case of interest in specialized outputs, user can use paid electronic service Specific statistical data acquisition where employees of SOSR prepares statistical outputs on the base of user requirements.
In this case, a principle of keeping statistical confidentiality will be taken into consideration.
All publications and outputs will be available free of charge on the SOSR's website in electronic form.
Information systems and information and communication technologies
A part of the project is also production of new election information system allowing electronic delivery of the election report.
In case of no-existing internet connection in a relevant division election commission, it is possible to complete the report in its offline electronic form and then to deliver to relevant district election commission.
This change will shorten the time of processing election results and is a halfway house to introduction of electronic voting in elections.
Needs and requirements resulting from the project were subjected to required analyses and proposals in 2011.
In September 2011, the project implementation started up together with planned sharp service around the turn of 2012 and 2013 based on these documents.
Information and communication technologies
In 2010, SOSR received funds to continue in the process of modernization of the information and communication technologies (ICT) environment.
The Office used these funds to build up modern secondary data centre (DC II on the level of Tier III (by Uptime Institute) with emphasis on redundancy of key components of infrastructure and ICT equipment.
In 2011, the Office realized migration of testing environment from primary data centre locality (DC I) to DC II locality after installation of ICT technology.
Highly available solution of IT services was implemented then on the level of data centres.
Implementation of these solutions provided high availability of IT services of SOSR also from geographic viewpoint.
In case of loss of the primary DC, IT services provided from the secondary DC will be fully accessible in a relatively short period.
An advantage of this solution is also higher flexibility in terms of accessibility of ICT sources of SOSR.
In case of increasing needs of ICT sources to ad hoc IT services, IT specialists know how to re-arrange online (without awareness of a user) ICT sources on required level of providing services.
The other advantage is separate testing and developing ICT environment that does not take away sources of the primary DC, the consequence of which are more extensive possibilities of testing information systems (IS).
These characteristics of implemented solution are very appreciated during testing and production operation of IS for PHC 2011.
A primary condition to meet objectives defined in the strategic documents is good functioning basic infrastructure of working stations and servers.
This infrastructure and standardized environment is necessary condition for functioning of our organization and realization of further projects.
In 2009, consolidation of many key IT activities started in ICT environment of SOSR.
This trend of consolidation continued also in 2010 and 2011.
Database and application consolidation was realized in 2009-2010.
Consolidation of infrastructural services of SOSR was finished by implementing communication environment of LYNC in 2011 in relation to defined objectives.
SOSR decisions relating to the range of usage of the Microsoft platform are based on existing knowledge and orientation on this platform, realized investments and evaluation of economic and operation factors.
We used currently licences of the package Desktop Enterprise in client computers within the EA in order to use effectively public sources and with our conception of IT development and defined objectives.
The project included following parts in terms of technology:  migration of domain services to the Windows Server 2008 R2 platform,  transition of communication infrastructure of SOSR from decentralized to centralized administration with transition from MS Exchange 2003 to MS Exchange 2010 with the emphasis on high availability of solution and protection of viruses, spyware and spams by usage of products of TMG 2010 and Forefront Protection 2010 for Exchange,
 introduction of MS SCCM 2007 R2 allowed to speed up and make easier administration and configuration of the environment of the whole SOSR infrastructure (about 1200 desktops),  introduction of communication platformMS Office Communications Server (LYNC) for communication purposes within SOSR (trying to decrease travel costs).
In order to introduce individual infrastructural servers, capacity of the new product MS Windows Server 2008 R2 with installed technology of Hyper-V allowing to develop fully virtualization platform and so to consolidate and optimize infrastructure.
SOSR took part in a competition Microsoft Industry Awards on best solution relating to this project with an implementer - company DataSystemSoft in the Slovak Republic in 2011 and took the first place in the category Best solution for state administration, self-government and academic sphere.
In 2011, the migration project of client stations from the platform of Windows XP and Office 2003 to Windows 7 and Office 2010 also started successfully as a follow-up to abovementioned project.
The budget was adjusted by twenty budgetary measures to EUR 36 016 671,71 in the course of 2011.
MF SR bounded incomes and expenditures in the amount of EUR 64 500 for reasons of non-realized budgetary incomes approved in the act on SB for 2011.
Approved limit of incomes in the amount of EUR 276 015 was increased by EUR 255 085,73 by the budgetary measure of MF SR during the year.
Non-realized incomes were affected mostly by no-interest in renting of spaces of SOSR and also by lower incomes for sale of statistical information due to free access on Internet.
Real incomes amounted to EUR 1 394 931, including non-fiscal incomes EUR 429 700 and nonbudgetary from external grants EUR 965 231 that were provided by the European Commission in order to introduce new statistical surveys.
Expected non-fiscal incomes were not met fully and therefore the Office reported a difference in non-realized incomes in the amount of EUR 36 901.
Expenditures on wages were realized in the amount of EUR 8 567 683 and related contributions to insurance companies in the amount of 2 995 363.
Other transfers were used on severance pay and medical benefits.
Comparison of approved and adjusted budget
Capital expenditures were spent on purchase of software, operation machines and equipment.
Electronic services of SOSR
Resources of EU and resources of SB for cofinancing of common programmes of the SR and EU in the total amount of EUR 9 073 893, including resources of EU in the amount of EUR 6 833 549 and resources on co-financing in the amount of EUR 2 240 344 were spent on financing the project Electronic services of SOSR that the Office deal with as a participant of the Interdepartmental Programme of OP Informatization of Society.
Resources were spent on capital expenditures - purchase of software and computer technology in compliance with purpose specification.
Priorities in 2012
Priority of the integrated quality management system of SOSR over next period will be its development in order to fully meet the requirements of the amended European Statistical Code of Practice and also of the norm ISO 9001.
Therefore attention will be paid to realization of the project Monitoring implementation of the principles of the European Statistical Code of Practice, where lacks will be identified and required activities on improvement will be formulated and implemented.
The project implementation will be supported also by prepared obligation to “ensure confidentiality in statistics” that shall be signed between national governments and the European Commission.
The project realization will also create appropriate conditions in order to manage successfully the expected external audit from ESS (peer review).
In order to create basis for monitoring efficiency and to propose activities that will help to increase the efficiency of SOSR, a significant contribution is realization of the cost management project that will be aimed at improvement of the routine operation quality of the information system on register of worked hours and on providing outputs for head employees.
Attention will also be aimed at realization of preparatory works for development of the system towards managerial information system.
Significant task will be education of SOSR's employees, mostly in the field of sample surveys, seasonal analysis of time series and protection of confidential statistical data and also cooperation on development of the statistical information system.
The field of classifications will firstly provide a development and legislative issue of the national classification of education fields harmonized with international standard classification of education ISCED 2011 and implementation of new classification to the statistical information system.
The very important task of the field of statistical registers will be a synchronization of processes of the national system for administration of statistical registers with processes developed within the European administration system of Eurogroup register (EGR).
The implementation of tools developed by EUROSAT in order to apply exchange standard SDMX will be a part of this task.
A decrease of burden and costs based on the obligation to provide statistical information is an ambition not only of the national statistics, but also of the European Statistical System in the whole process of the data base production.
Priority to 2012 will be application of measures in order to provide optimization of statistical surveys and reduction of statistical burden of respondents and producer.
A decrease of the range and periodicity of acquired data and also of the number of ad
dressed reporting units was largely applied on the side of a producer.
Over the next period, effectiveness will be searched on one hand in introduction of new electronic services and on other hand mostly in communication with owners of administrative data sources in order to use more intensively these sources.
In 2012, consolidation and harmonization of metadata that is a logical part of continuing consolidation of data base and project activities relating to the national project Electronic services of SOSR will continue.
The objective to 2012 is to cover data disseminated by the Office by reference metadata, but implementation of the Statistical Data and Meta data Exchange (SDMX) and the European standard for reference metadata will be take into consideration.
The aim is to improve the national system of metadata, harmonization and integration within the ESS.
It will be required to pay attention to gradual solution of reservations of EUROSTAT that the Office received in January 2012 on the base of the results of two missions of EUROSTAT to problems of sources and methods of compilation of the gross national income and subsequent comparison of results of missions for all EU countries.
Price statistics will be aimed mostly at monthly survey realized within the methodology harmonization project of the consumer price survey for purposes of calculation of HICP and of the European Comparison Programme in 2012.
The calculation of real estate price indices and price indices of goods and services relating to owner-occupied housing will continue.
The revision of weight schemes will continue to calculate construction work price indices and price indices in agriculture in the field of prices of production statistics.
Priority task of external trade statistics will be to provide testing functionality of ISIS for controls, imputations, processing and outputs of external trade statistics in cooperation with a solver.
Other analysis of possible impacts on quality of provided data will be realized according to EUROSTAT decisions on INTRASTAT simplification.
Working meetings with key reporting units that have problems with regular data providing on time are
planned.
Workshops will be provided for reporting units, this form of data providing on the INTRASTAT system is the most required.
The activities relating to modernization of methods will continue in business statistics to provide inputs and also outputs of the statistical information system in 2012.
The objective is to achieve further decrease of administrative response burden by searching possibilities of broader usage of administrative sources, multiple and effective usage of surveyed data in information and publication system of SOSR.
The survey on global value series, aim of which is to acquire information on range and categories of business activities externally provided from abroad from own foreign affiliations or from external foreign subjects will be realized in connection to the Program of Modernisation of European Enterprise and Trade Statistics (MEETS) in non-financial enterprises employing 100 people or more.
Statistics of foreign affiliations will be focused mostly on implementation of the SK NACE Rev. 2 structure in datasets on external foreign affiliations and also changes relating to updating of FATS Manual of recommendations.
The priority of structural business statistics will be processing of final data for 2010 including the file of tradesmen and financial annexes of the regulation on structural statistics.
Results will be a base for preparation of the UN Energy Statistics Manual.
The centre of activities of tourism statistics will be compilation of the tourism satellite account and finishing the ESSnet project on time.
Activities of science and research statistics will be aimed at the development of methodology in order to monitor indirect support of research and development and activities on realization of obligations to providing information to EUROSTAT, international institutions, central bodies of state administration, professional and laic public will continue similarly than in all business statistics.
Social statistics will be aimed at realization of tasks relating to further processing and presentations of data surveyed in CPH 2011 and to processing of pre-defined outputs for users as well as to realize an additional survey on transition from works to retirement within the labour force sample survey.
The field of dissemination and providing statistical information will be aimed at implementation of marketing objectives of the Office in order to know better needs of customers and to satisfy their growing requests on quality and complexity of products and services of the Office.
Attention will be paid to the extension of contents and forms of products accessible via Internet that is a dominant form of statistical information dissemination.
Products focused on analysis and presentation of data by modern sources allowing easy to present and understand the statistics will be preferentially developed.
The objective of the Office is to increase the level of products in terms of quality of their content, to support knowledge dissemination of statistical indicators, their methodology and also of possibilities and limits of their usage.
Great attention will be paid to development of good relations with different groups of customers, to intensification of communication between users and producers of statistics what will contribute to development of customer oriented statistics.
The management of human resources will be affected by continuing optimization of processes at workplaces of the Office in regions, in which the Personnel Office will significantly participate mostly by preparation of personnel documents and related documentation in relation to employees in the next year.
Significant task will be personnel provision of the early elections to the National Council of the SR 2012.
Important task will be the education of employees in order to strengthen the Office position within the national and the European Statistical System.
Implementation of the national project Education as a tool of the development of modern statistics funded by the European Social Fond will largely contribute to this task.
About 800 employees of the Office will take part in the national project and its part will be education events aimed at the improvement of managerial competences, social and psychological skills of employees, professional statistical education and language preparation.
The main task of information systems and information and communication technologies will be successful finishing of the project Electronic services of SOSR in 2012, it means in practice to put into operation new Integrated statistical information system (ISIS).
President of the office
General Methodolgy and Registers Section
Registers and Classification Department
Database Preparation Department
Information Systems Department
Comprehensive Publications and Regional Statistics Department
Information and Communication Technology Department
Statistical Surveys and Methodology Department
Database Coordination Section
Statistical Products and Services Provision Section
Informatics Section
Department of Crisis Management , IT Security and Classified Information
Vice-president of the office
Department of Social Statistics
National Accounts Department
External Trade Statistics Department
Social Statistics and Demography Section
Business Statistics Section
Regional Office Trnava
Industry Statistics Department
Cross-sectional Statistics Department
Regional Office Banská Bystrica
Agricultural Statistics Department
Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic Miletičova 3
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Bratislava Hanulova 5/c, P.O. BOX 18
Phone: +421-2-69250 101, 2-69297 101
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Trnava Osvaldova 2
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Trenčín Kniežaťa Pribinu 28
Information service and store of SOSR
Phone: +421-2-50236 428
Institute of Informatics and Statistics - INFOSTAT Dúbravská cesta 3
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Źilina Framborská 23
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in B. Bystrica Trieda SNP 75
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Prešov Plzenská 2, P.O.BOX 16
Statistical Office of the SR - workplace of SOSR in Košice Werferova 3
Mo - Tu 8.00 - 12.00
Wed 8.00 - 12.00 13.00 - 15.00
Th - Fr 8.00 - 12.00
Mo - Tu 8.30 - 10.30 14.30 - 15.30
contents
We continued in deepening of integration of the European Statistics Code of Practice
Production of cost - optimal database
We serve customers
We publish periodical Slovak statistics and demography
Priorities in 2013
Organizational structure 2012
For the Statistical Office the year 2012 was another year of implementation of high-quality, relevant and timely statistical data helping managers at various managerial levels, state or private institutions and enterprises to make right, qualified and real-time decisions.
In the field of methodology, the Statistical Office of the SR was successfully continuing in the integration process of another administrative data sources into business statistics and within strengthening the quality enhancement tools of statistical outputs, it prepared self-evaluation of the statistical production processes.
The National Account Department paid attention to the transformation of sector data within implementation of the classification SK NACE Rev.2 into the system of national accounts.
Slovakia was one of the 5 member countries where the requirements of this regulation were fully satisfied.
Immensely important task was the implementation of the new
regulation to the system of national and regional accounts ESA2010 which should enter into force in 2014.
In price statistics, the revision of weight schemes for calculating price indices of construction, agricultural products and market services was conducted.
The department actively participated in the Eurostat project focused on comparison of absolute values of consumer prices of selected goods within EU individual countries as well as in the Eurostat project aimed at calculation of price indices of real estates and goods and services related to owner-occupied dwellings.
Besides the monthly processing of statistical data of foreign trade and their de-updating, the Office conducted Eurostat activities aimed at simplification of the system of INTRASTAT, by means of the so-called SIMSTAT.
have a negative effect on the quality of data provided to the most important customers.
The year 2012, was a decisive one in the processing of the 2011 Population and Housing Census results.
The first results were released and 8 publications on basic demographic characteristics on the national, regional, district and municipal levels were issued.
The works related to output reports for domestic and international users and for the Eurostat started.
The whole database of the 2011 Population and Housing Census was updated in demography statistics, at national level.
In short-term business statistics the focus of the works is aimed at meeting the deadlines of the first data transmission.
In 2012, the works related to the preparation of the new base year 2010 and the new weight scheme for calculating short-term progress indices were performed.
In overall compatibility assessment with the regulation on short-term statistics, the SO SR was included in the first category of EU member states for having the best compatibility level.
The aim of the Operational Programme Informatization of Society is to ensure 20 basic services of the e-Government.
The project Electronic Services of the Statistical Office of the SR will provide input and output electronic services which aim to enhance the performance of surveys statistical surveys.
For the purposes of communication with international institutions, an international standard SDMX with the possibility of data mapping and provision in this format, was implemented in the Statistical Office of the SR.
Establishment of the new election information system is also part of the project.
In the field of statistical data dissemination, the Office focused on the provision of high quality products and services in accordance with the overall development strategy.
The Office's website played a prominent role by means of which the users could obtain actual statistical data, download information or publications of the Office from databases.
Based on knowledge base enhancements of customers, the Office organized meetings with the potential users of statistical data.
SOSR
The Statistical Office is a budgetary organization with its incomes and expenditures being a part of the state budget of the Slovak Republic
SOSR1: a) develops and publishes the policy of national statistics b) compiles the Programme of State Statistical Surveys in co-operation with ministries and state organizations c) defines methodology of statistical surveys and collects and processes statistical data d) defines methodology for maintenance of the system of national accounts and compiles national accounts e) sets up, releases and keeps classifications, nomenclatures and registers in co-operation with the ministries and state authorities f) defines the method of setting up the registers, assigns and issues identification numbers g) elaborates analyses of selected characteristics of the social, economic and environmental development of the SR
Identification of organization
The conduct of the project will increase the quality and reliability of statistics produced in the SO SR.
We continued in deepening of integration
of the European Statistics Code of Practice
ing for selected statistical surveys.
In October 2012, the second recertification audit performed by the classification society Bureau Veritas Certification confirmed the harmonization of the implemented quality
In the field of methodology, in 2012, the SO SR focused mostly on the preparation and technical realisation of regular self-assessments of all statistical surveys.
New possibilities of the use of administrative data sources were surveyed as one of the optimization tool of statistical surveys and burden reduce of respondents and producers.
We assume that these activities will enable further cancellation of some surveys in certain respondent groups.
Or at least they will help to improve the quality of statistical outputs.
Within these activities, some selected employees participated in a course on the Calculation of Selected Quality Indicators for the Need of Qualitative Reports and the Protection of Statistical Data Confidentiality in Microdata Files which aimed to teach the course participants to depersonalize microdata used for research purposes.
The course focused on data protection by using the software μ- Argus with R programme support.
In the field of methodology of confidential statistical data, the SO SR actively took part in its solving by means of expert groups at European level.
Besides the scheduled tasks, various ad-hoc requests of internal and external customers were solved, in the field of methodology.
The external requests concerned mostly the depersonalization of microdata for research purposes but the OECD/INES request for the estimation of specific indicators by using linear regression was solved as well.
During 2012, the statistical classifications and code lists in accordance with their international norms and standards continued developing.
A Statistical code list of countries for the purposes of the official statistics, was issued
What the last year brought in methodology
This classification concerns scientific and educational disciplines at universities and education or learning disciplines at secondary schools.
In 2012, the Ministry of Interior of the SR was offered a methodological assistance regarding the application of the classification of economic activities SK NACE Rev.2 for the purposes of agenda management and trade licensing.
The priority of the statistical registers in 2012 still remained the data provision necessary for the production and further development of the register of transnational enterprise groups managed by Eurostat within the system of EuroGroup Register of enterprises (EGR).
The standardization of process of consolidation and data integration registered in the statistical register of organizations with EGR data was also an important part of the cooperation with Eurostat.
This cooperation resulted in production of final EGR population for 2010 which was finished and made available by Eurostat in March 2012.
To monitor progress of activities included in the EU Strategy 2020, indicators on rapidly growing innovative enterprises in the SR for 2011 were provided to the European Commission in September 2012.
The calculation of the required indicators was realized by the common methodology of Eurostat and OECD from data registered in the statistical organi
zations register and in other administrative data sources as well.
In 2012, in the field of statistical registers an increased attention was paid to increasing their quality, mostly by means of effective use of administrative data sources obtained from the social security system.
No new regular state statistical survey will be conducted.
The Programme included two new one-time European surveys conducted by the SO SR: Ad hoc survey of the global formation of values (GVC-1-01) and Crime and safety survey (SASU 1-01).
The new 3-year programme includes surveys whose periodicity is done multi-annually: 2,3-or 5-yearly.
The SO SR conducts eight such surveys (Inov 1-92, org SP1-92, Poľ 20-93, NSPO 1-93, NSRO 1-93, MO 1-93, Org UZ 2-93 and EHIS 1-95), ministries and state organizations conduct two such surveys (Škol (MŠVVŠ SR) 31-92 and MK (MDVRR SR) 1-93).
In 2012 compared with 2011, the number of questionnaires increased by 5 for short-term surveys and decreased by 7 for long-term surveys.
There were about 200 administrative sources used by the SO SR which are managed by 25 ministries and state organizations which obtained, compiled, processed or stored the data in pursuing their activities.
The existing administrative sources were used instead of new data collections or
Number of items in forms
statistical techniques but started to be used for comparison and linking of statistical and administrative data or implement new approaches which enable replacement of some data by modelling.
Usage of administrative sources was one of the aspects contributing to the decrease of response burden.
By the regular review of data necessary to be included in statistical surveys, it was found out that the range of surveyed data was restricted during the years 2008-2011.
The response burden of respondents by number of items (NI) increased year-on-year (2011 to 2010) by 3,45% however, compared with 2008 it was down by 32,07%.
Evaluation of statistical surveys by 3 circles of reporting units: enterprises and entrepreneurs, households and public administration showed the following results.
In 2011, the most significant decrease of NI was again in statistics on enterprises and entrepreneurs.
This burden decreased year-on-year (2011 to 2010) by 3,41%.
Compared with 2008, the decrease of NI of enterprises and entrepreneurs is close to the half (-47,89%).
Unlike the enterprises and entrepreneurs, the NI of households and public administration increased year-on-year.
Compared with 2008, NI of households increased by 15,72% year-on-year.
The increase was mostly the result of the fact that in 2011 the survey was conducted multi-annually (AES 1-01).
The questionnaire completion time calculated in minutes decreased year-on-year between 2008 to 2010 by 13,71%.
The average survey completion time evaluated in 2010, there was a decrease by 18,45% between 2011 and 2008.
Number of items in enterprises and entrepreneurs, population and public administration compared with 2008
enterprises and entrepreneurs
households
public administration
Number items 2008 Number of items 2009
Number of items 2010 Number of items 2011
ddddddddddd en ennttttttttr ttr
mi i tt ist st tratiiion ttttttttt tttt ratiiiiiiii
National accounts comprise a compatible framework for systematic and detailed description of the entire economy as well as of individual sectors and subsectors, where all levels of economic process (production, creation and division of incomes, their usage, accumulation and financial transactions) are collected.
They are compiled by the methodology of European System of National and Regional Accounts 1995ESA 95.
The development of the national accounts system in compliance with the new EU regulations and directives is one of the main objectives of macro-economic statistics.
Works in the field of national accounts
The annual sector accounts for 2011, in the range of the transmission programme pursuant to the Eurostat requirements were compiled, based on the information of the statistical reporting system, administrative data sources and additional information.
An increased attention was paid to the implementation of sector division based on NACE Rev2 for the whole time series 1995-2011.
Deadlines for the transmission of national accounts data to the Eurostat were met, pursuant to the transmission programme ESA 95.
At the beginning of the year, annual national accounts data were revised non-standardly due to verifying conclusions of autumn notification of EDP 2011 which were sent to the Eurostat and released on the Office's website in March 2012.
The standard autumn revision of data for the years 2010 and 2009 was con
ducted and released in compliance with the revision policy available at the website of the SO SR.
Besides the standard compilation of financial accounts data for all economic sectors, a great attention was paid to data revision of stock indicators where in close cooperation with the NBS we managed to eliminate various differences and inconsistencies between data compiled by the SO SR and NBS.
These inconsistencies resulted from the lack of information on individual financial tools used in the past while at present the NBS database has improved which recently helped to unify the approach and eliminate the extent of the items estimated.
Flash GDP and employment estimates were provided regularly within 45 days once the reference quarter ended.
Quarterly national accounts data were compiled fully in compliance with the ESA 95 transmission programme and regularly released within 65 days once the reference quarter ended.
Data of quarterly accounts are seasonally adjusted in accordance with the regulations and directions of the European Union.
In the 2.quarter of 2012, the Eurostat carried out a dialog mission regarding the problems of procedures of excessive deficit and debt in Slovakia and also a control mission to problems of regional data quality.
New tasks which resulted from these missions require an increased attention.
Within the spring and autumn notification of EDP, data in notification tables including EDP questionnaire and other necessary informa
tion were sent to the Eurostat according tothe deadline.
EU Member States are required to provide data on gross national income and data on GDP for the preparation of the EU budget.
The National Accounts Department prepared standardly for the MF SR a draft of gross national income estimates and data on compensation for small companies exempted from VAT and data on weighted average VAT rate.
At the same time, through the permanent mission in Brussels, a questionnaire was sent to the Eurostat containing data on transition from GDP to GNP, quality report with all in
formation on changes and supplements for methodological approaches for compiling the final GDP/GNP data.
Except the routine tasks of individual statistical themes, the employees of the National Accounts Department were dealing with works related to the grant project GP 02-11 Methodological and technical improvement of national accounts, where they devoted their utmost effort to the quality improvement of quarterly national accounts and TDP tables, shortening the deadline of regional accounts by one year and to the preparation of the future ESA 2010 requirements, in the new table
GDP development in time series 1995-2011 in mil.
EUR
GDP - constant prices of previous year GDP - constant prices calculated by chaining volumes
Poznámka: Note:
• Current prices calculated by chaining volumes with the use of reference year 2005
of the next transmission programme regarding pension schemes.
The completion of various questionnaires for international organizations (CMFB, Eurostat, ILO, OECD, UNECE etc.) required a great deal of work.
The Department intensively participated on the preparation of the new legislation of ESA 2010 including several rounds of applications for derogations and several linguistic reviews of the Slovak translation.
Considering that the document contains more than 1000 pages, the processing of the relevant comments was extremely time-consuming.
GDP year-on-year development increases in %
GDP- constant prices calculated by chaining volumes
• CPLY- corresponding period last year
• Constant prices calculated by chaining volumes with use of reference year 2005
the calculation of price indices of real estates and services related to owner-occupied dwellings.
It also participated in the regulation making process aiming to implement the harmonized methodology of the calculation of price indices of real estates and services related to owner-occupied dwellings.
In 2012, the External Trade Statistics Department continued in processing the data of external trade statistics (ET).
The Department's credo for the year 2012 remained the quality improvement of the processed data and raising the statistical awareness of reporting units.
The deadline laid down for 2012, where the data for external trade statistics were processed and indices of import and export prices, were kept.
It concerned processing of various questionnaires or work and active participation in special Eurostat working groups (task force and steering committee) for SIMSTAT.
Analyses continued to be performed and the impact of the proposed simplifications on external trade statistics data was monitored.
The simplification of INTRASTAT should negatively affect the extent and quality of data provided to the most important users within the Office or in individual resorts outside the SO SR.
The implementation of the Eurostat recommendations also continued.
In 2012, mirror data comparisons of external trade for 2010 and 2011 were realized, in collaboration with the Czech Statistical Office.
In accordance with the legislation in force, the code lists and the guide for reporting units were updated.
During the year, reporting units were given 8 seminars on the INTRASTAT-SK system and were attended by 121 candidates.
Besides the basic information on INTRASTAT-SK, the seminars provided an overview of the latest legislative changes.
The major part of seminars was devoted to answers of the participants' specific questions.
These kinds of seminars are the most desired by reporting units.
At the initiative of the Department, several meetings were organized with reporting units having problems with quality and timeliness of the transmitted data.
An intensive work of the help-desk also continued- help to reporting units with their problems concerning INTRASTAT report completion, or registering, report sending etc.
A value added publication-an extended yearbook of external trade statistics was issued.
In the future it will be published in an expanded form.
In the last calendar year, the Business Statistics Section also continued in implementing the new EU regulations and directives in respective statistics.
The centre of activities in business short-term statistics was aimed at meeting the deadlines of the first data transmission, i.e. one of the priorities of the Eurostat and of the European Central Bank.
Preparation works were realized concerning the preparation of the new base year 2010 and the new weight scheme for short-term progress statistics related to it.
In overall compatibility assessment, the SO SR is included in the first category of member states with the best compatibility level, in accordance with the regulation on short-term statistics.
The annual structural statistics compiled sets of the final indicators for 2010 and transmitted them on time.
Data on tradesmen from the administrative data sources were included for the first time in output files.
The procedure proposed in the MEETS project (Modernisation of European Enterprise and Trade Statistics) based on data combination from statistical surveys and administrative sources was used in file processing.
Pursuant to new competencies of the Business Statistics Department data files for 2011 were compiled and sent to the Eurostat according to the deadline.
Also in the field of structural statistics, the SO SR was included in the first category of member states with the best level of compatibility with the regulation on structural statistics.
Data files for 2010 on domestic foreign affiliates were compiled and transmitted.
In the statistics of non-domestic foreign affiliates a new classification of eco
nomic activities SK NACE Rev.2 was compiled according to the timetable.
New structured reports on quality were prepared for all the fields required.
The Office actively participated in a discussion and consultation exercise on the proposal of package changes for the field of short-term statistics, structural statistics and foreign affiliations statistics.
Activities in statistics of industry were focused on the preparation and implementation of the transition to a new base year for 2010 for the industrial production index calculation in compliance with the EU regulation on shortterm statistics.
In order to fulfil these tasks, the category of product representatives was updated and new weights were established for the industrial production index calculation.
This category of products representatives includes subcontracting codes based on generation activities or labour hired.
Based on negotiations with NBS representatives, data will be transmitted to NBS for the indicator New orders in industry, from the second half of 2012.
It is an important indicator used by the central bank for its own analytical purposes and for evaluating the current state of economy, its short-term outlook and mainly in forecasting the so-called turnover points in industry development as the most important sector of the Slovak economy.
At the same time, NBS provides the distribution of these data to the European Central Bank.
Main attention in business statistics of construction, housing, trade and services was paid to the preparation and implementation of the transition to the new base year (year 2010=100) including the back-casting of time series.
Further works focused on quality improvement of database by means of optimization activities of the processing chain including estimates for the surveyed indicators.
An international project, which was part of
the common harmonized programme of the business and consumer surveys of EU, was realized in the business surveys.
The main priority of business consumer surveys was the quality improvement of the collection and response rate of questionnaires,sample sizes in the sector of industry, construction, retail trade and services.
In the publication system, the structure of the data published was completed, verified and updated for all databases of time series according to the requirement of ECFIN and of external and internal users.
The activities of the consumer barometer were aimed at data acquisition on the mood, expectations and investment plans of the Slovak population on the sample size of all age groups aged 16 and over.
number of dwellings
started built partially completed
retail trade, services, investment in industry and consumer barometer were regularly monthly delivered to the European Commission in accord with the timetable.
Data were used in construction of confidence indicators in individual branches and on production of synthetic composite indicators, economic sentiment indicator (IES) on national and international level.
The cooperation with INFOSTAT, the scientific research centre of the SO SR aimed mostly at field of data utilization of business consumer surveys, flash estimates of GDP in quarterly periodicity, prediction of short-term development of basic business indicators and construction of leading indicators and potential turnover points in the development of Slovak economy.
In the field of statistics of science, technology and innovations, activities were aimed at results processing of the survey on innovations, which is a common survey of EU countries, ensuring the required outputs of Eurostat databases, elaboration of the quality report and data release in the publication system of the SO SR.
In energy statistics, an increased attention was paid to the quality of surveyed data.
All surveys were realized in relevant areas in compliance with the EU regulations including data transmissions to EUROSTAT databases, International Energy Agency and the United Nations Statistics Division.
Beyond the scope of regular tasks, information were provided for the questionnaire of the United Nations Statistics Division on experiences in data acquisition, compilation and dissemination of data on energy statistics which will be a basis for the production of the Manual for Energy Statistics Producers.
The manual will be a practical guide for the implementation of international requirements of energy statistics.
In the field of information society, the Office participated in the survey on usage of information and communication technologies in enterprises and households organized by Eurostat and on information technology costs.
surveys were provided to a broad public within the publication system of the Office.
By elaborating the comments, we took part in the extension of the regulation by another three modules, namely by the module on en
vironmental protection expenditures, module on the environmental goods and services sector and the module on physical energy flow.
Attention was paid also to keeping all the reporting duties resulting from the legislation of the EU for waste management, sale of plant protection products, environmental protection expenditures and the inland waters.
The results for international comparison were provided in April 2012 and for the domestic users were published at the Office's website.
In 2012, the Department of Agricultural Statistics prepared and released a harvest estimation of selected crops for June, August and September 2012.
The definite results for the Economic Account for Agriculture of the SR for the year 2011 were released in September 2012.
They participated in international workshops organized by the Eurostat, European Commission,
OECD, International Energy Agency and UNECE and contributed with their presentations, processing of comments and completion of questionnaires to the production of manuals prepared by international organizations.
The grant project on global formation of values was realized.
A statistical survey GVC 1-01 was carried out in enterprises with 100 or more employees and its results were transmitted to the Eurostat in December.
The aim of the project was to obtain information on the scope and types of external business activities from abroad from own non-domestic affiliations or external foreign subjects.
In the field of tourism statistics, an ESSnet project was finished whose aim was to explore possibility for implementing XML- based electronic data collection directly from the accommodation management information system.
The most important activity of the internal cooperation in the field of demographic statistics was the collaboration in the preparation of the European legislation.
The Proposal of a Regulation on European demographic statistics was heard in the meeting of working group on statistics at the Council of the EU and reported to the European Parliament.
In demographic statistics, the whole database of the 2011 Population and Housing Census was updated based on census results, at national level.
Data consolidation continued, besides the balance data, monthly processed consolidated data have become available as well.
In the field of population balance, besides the balancing by sex, age, ethnic nationality and marital status, the population started to be balanced by citizenship, country of birth and education as well.
In developing the system of international migration statistics, the source database was established for the first time which will be updated once a year.
sued.
The works related to output reports for the domestic and international users and for the Eurostat started.
In 2012, household accounts statistics, standardly realized a collection of data on income and expenditures of private households.
Data are used in the production of social policy of the SR's government.
External domestic and international organizations are the most interested in depersonalized microdata and use them mostly in the analyses of household living conditions.
The Survey on incomes and living conditions of households, regularly organized by the Statistical Office of the SR since 2005, is the main data source giving a complex overview of poverty, social exclusion and living conditions.
Processed microdata and indicators of the EU SILC 2011 survey were delivered and depersonalized microdata were provided, based on standard and ad-hoc queries, to external customers for scientific and research purposes.
The data were presented in two publications: EU SILC 2011- Survey on Incomes and Living Conditions of Households in the SR and EU SILC 2011- Indicators of Poverty and Social Exclusion.
Based on EU SILC 2011 results, the percentage of households at risk of poverty or social exclusion was 20,6%.
Based on annual sample survey results on wage structure, the primary short-term indicators were supplemented by detailed data on wage components, wage level by personal characteristics and share of employees in wage bands.
Based on individual employee reports provided by this survey, medians and wage values were calculated, according to another statistical characteristics.
13,0 % At-risk-of-poverty rate threshold
10,6 % Material deprivation
20,6 % Indicator of poverty and social exclusion
6,1 % Low work intensity
employers to employees were processed from other annual surveys.
The main priority of labour statistics was to ensure data availability on employment development, economic inactivity, short-term labour migration and job vacancies.
The SO SR continued to increase the proportion of data collection in the LFSS through electronic questionnaires in the 2.quarter.
The combined method of data collection is part of the national action plan in order to increase the quality of this survey.
In the 2.quarter we realized a complementary survey of the LFSS on transition from work to retirement.
The survey aimed to obtain data on the methods and reasons why active persons quit their jobs and on the conditions of their longer stay in the labour market.
Data from the gender equality database and from the publication Gender Equality 2012 serve as a basis for the Report on Gender Equality prepared by the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR.
In both cases, the microdata database outputs are provided to Eurostat and to domestic and international users.
In 2012, the SO SR provided statistical information to the Eurostat on non-financial data on health care within the common data collection of OECD, WHO and Eurostat and also data on accidents at work, based on the methodology of the European Statistics of Accidents at Work (ESAW) and data on occupational diseases based on the methodology of the European Occupational Diseases Statistics (EODS) for 2009.
The provision of quantitative and qualitative data on social protection for 2009 and 2010 were realized in compliance with the legislation and methodology of ESSPROS and the provision of qualitative and quantitative data on active and passive labour market policy were realized in compliance with the methodology of the Labour Market Policy database.
Data on statistics of social protection, education, culture, crime, disability to work for disease or accident, non-profit associations, compulsory social insurance and statistical data on health were provided systematically to the relevant state institutions, international organizations and to the public database.
The SO SR provided statistical information on financial and non-financial data on health, occupational diseases, accidents at work and crime for 2010.
Demographic research centre
Information on the DRC activities is available at the website www.infostat.sk/vdc.
The monitoring of task performance was realized quarterly.
All the scheduled tasks were fulfilled in required deadlines, range and quality.
birth
natural increase
death
number of population (thos.)
birth/death/migration increase (thos.)
Characteristics of population development for the SR during 1950-2012
no data available from the population register.
Additionally to the scheduled tasks, employees of DRC were dealing with unplanned (topical) tasks required by individual departments usually in the form of working documents, supporting documents, opinions and evaluations.
A significant task of DRC in 2012 was the cooperation in view of the 2011 Population and Housing Census data processing.
DRC continued developing the cooperation with domestic and non-domestic demographic institutions.
Employees of DRC were solving various projects, prepared presentations and contributions to international journals.
The most important was the SEEMIG project.
It is a foremost international project aimed at the use of statistical data on demography and migration for the policy production at various regional levels in the Central and Southeast Europe.
RDC was dealing mostly with the problem of population prognoses.
Employees of DRC are involved mostly in the pedagogical process at the Faculty of Natural Sciences of the Comenius University, Faculty of Education of the Comenius Unive rsity, Faculty of Social and Economic Sciences of the Comenius University and the Slovak Medical University where they are engaged in presentation activities in the field of demography.
The year 2012 was an immensely important and demanding year for the election statistics department.
Early elections were held to the National Council of the SR and new elections to the municipality self-government bodies.
In March 2012, Elections to the National Council of the SR were held.
The SO SR collaborated with the Ministry of Interior of the SR during the preparation and processing of election results.
In compliance with the organisational and technical arrangements of elections, the SO SR issued a methodology and elaborated a project on automated results processing of elections.
Based on the list of registered candidates, an electronic register of candidates was prepared, publicly available at the website of the Statistical Office.
During the election results processing, the preliminary results were presented at the Office's website.
After signing the minutes of the Central Election Commission, the SO SR published the final election results in printed form and also up to the level of districts at its website.
In March 2012, additionally to the Elections to the National Council of the SR, new elections to the municipality self-government bodies (by-elections to bodies of (local) and city council) were held as well.
For the processing of election results, 9 expert (summarizing) departments for the district election commissions and expert (summarizing) department also for the Central Election Commission were established in 11 municipalities.
7 municipal mayors and 1 city mayor were elected.
For 27.
October 2012, the President of the National Council of the SR declared new elections to the bodies of municipal self-government (by election to bodies of municipal (local) and city councils).
The SO SR realized processing of results in 33 municipalities.
The municipalities delivered a report with results to 22 district election commissions.
27 municipal mayors and 1 city mayor were elected.
For 3 municipalities, the President of the National Council of the SR declared new elections within the 14-day period stipulated by law, from the day the results are released by the Central Election Commission.
Even employees of the regional offices of the SR, participated intensively in the fulfilment of tasks at the election statistics department.
Number of mandates assigned to political parties
The Institute of Informatics and Statistics (INFOSTAT), as a research and development workplace of state statistics cooperates as usual with the SO SR.
The cooperation of the SO SR and INFOSTAT is based on a contract concluded between the two organisations for the relevant year.
The thematic orientation of the contract takes into account the priority statistical activities of the Office.
 Methodological solutions- of support and application of dynamic regression of time series; satellite account in tourism; problems of analyses and modelling of time series; use of statistical data from short
term surveys; problems of business statistics; new method of the survey on incomes and expenditures of household accounts and EU SILC,
 Updating and development - of APV and databases of the Urban and Municipal Statistics (UMS) and the Urban Information System (UIS) software for VZDC, business surveys and balancing energy,
 Analytical outputs- of the 2011 Population and Housing Census, life tables, population balances, population movement and types of residence, prognosis of population development and educational structure of the population of the SR.
The activity of INFOSTAT for 2012 is completely documented in a special report available at the Office's website www.statistics.sk in the part About us/Key documents/Annual reports
The SO SR continued realizing the action programmes to meet the strategic objectives in the field of customer service provision.
Activities were aimed at satisfying the needs and expectations of statistical users, based on the approved Marketing Plan of the SO SR for
The SO SR provided the domestic and foreign customers with data sets defined in the products portfolio.
Regarding domestic customers, there were especially legislative and executive bodies of the state administration, such as the National Bank of Slovakia, the Ministry of Finance of the SR, the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR and the Ministry of Economy of the SR.
In total, 171 data sets were provided to these institutions.
The resorts used the obtained statistical information for analyzing of the social and economic development of society and also in management and decision-making processes.
Meeting the requirements of international and intergovernmental organizations of which the SR was a member, was realized mostly for the Eurostat, the organization for European Cooperation and Development (OECD), the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), the International Labour Organization (ILO), and the International Energy Agency (IEA).
derstanding and increasing of the customer knowledge in the field of statistics and exploring the expectations of key customers.
Individual professional departments at the Central and Regional Offices of the SO SR organized various working meetings, discussions, lectures and personal discussions with the key customers.
In 2012, the SO SR organized 79 marketing activities, in total, with the participation of more than 1700 existing and potential statistical users.
Customers were provided with information on the range and possibilities of statistical information provision, dissemination forms, data usage in decision-making processes and data acquisition form the public databases of the Office.
The SO SR provided information from different thematic areas of statistics via the information service.
In 2012, 3478 requests were fulfilled by the Central Office of the So SR and 3157 requests by regional offices of the SO SR.
6095 of the total number of requests were for domestic users and 540 for external subjects.
In addition, a considerable number of requests were handled by phone or in person.
The highest interest was in information on demography and social statistics (39,3% requests for information).
Over the year, the seasonality of interest rate for information became more pronounced.
The highest share of demanding requests was recorded
The number of met requests by thematic fields
Interest in the statistical information by customer groups
Year 2012 Year 2011
Multi-domain statistics
Banking, finance
Enterprises, associations, fields
Broad public and others
International and external institutions State administration and municipality
in the statistical field of macroeconomic statistics.
In 2012, in the field of service provision, the Office continued with the grant project of Eurostat European Statistical Data Support (ESDS) relating to the European statistics user support.
The realized activities were governed by a gentleman's agreement with Eurostat.
Monthly development of the number of met requests of the SOSR in the years 2010 - 2012
Year 2010
Year 2011
Year 2012
Long-term monthly average
available on the Office's website, was intensively used by the professional and lay public.
8 754 registered users visited the database who realized 133 757 data extractions.
The most interesting statistical fields for the users were mostly indicators from demography and social statistics (42,1%), macroeconomic statistics (29%) and business statistics (14,3%).
The most extractions were made by students (more than a half) and users from business, science and research sector (almost a quarter).
One of the main objectives set in the strategy of the Office is to increase systematically the institution value for parties concerned and its credit at national and international level.
The Office monitors fulfilling of this objective through the credibility indicator of the SOSR.
In 2012, the SOSR carried out the credibility survey by external independent organization on a representative sample of 1013 inhabitants of the SR in the age group over 18 years old.
The survey results illustrated that 57 % of the respondents expressed a confidence to the SOSR.
Statistical publications were continuously issued in both electronic version and hardcopies according to the Catalogue of Publications 2012.
The SOSR issued together 85 publications in monthly, quarterly and annual periodicity and almost all of them were available in Pdf on the Office's website.
Figures 2012, Regions in Pocket 2011, Slovakia in EU 2012 and … Region in Figures (for each region separately).
Publications View into the Regions of Slovakia 2006 - 2010, Population of the SR in the Context of the European Year of Active Ageing and Use of Information and Communication technology in the Slovak Republic belonged to the publications with added value.
Next interesting publications issued by the Office were Social Trends in the Slovak Republic 2012 and Food Consumption in the Slovak Republic in 2011.
Comprehensive overview of statistical information characterizing the position of women and men in current society was presented in the publication Gender Equality 2012.
Throughout of the year, the Office progressively published basic results of the Population and Housing Census
The Office continued issuing its scientific reviewed periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography by the 22nd volume.
It represents the only one scientific periodical issued in Slovakia in the field of statistics and demography.
It is aimed at providing updated information on new and modern statistical methods and statistical procedures focused on effectiveness and quality improvement of statistical outputs.
There are also other areas of information provision, such as coordinated cooperation between Eurostat and national statistical offices in the field of harmonization statistical surveys and the position of the Slovak statistics within the European Statistical System.
The periodical publishes original articles of analytical character, prognoses, discussion contributions, opinions, reviews, information articles and announcements aimed at different statistical fields (national accounts, production statistics, social statistics, statistics of living conditions and poverty, environment etc.).
sus, theoretical and methodological bases of demography as well as contributions of historical demography.
In 2012, Office's major activities in the field of international cooperation were carried out mostly within the European Statistical System (ESS) which continued in activities aimed at implementation of vision regarding the development of European statistics of 2010.
Its main objective, in longer term period, is to support further modernization, better integration and effectiveness of statistical system.
sentatives of the Office participated actively in preparation and approval processes of those documents within the European Commission and the Council of the EU.
The aim of the external business trips was active involvement of the Office's representatives in working groups and other types of events organized within the ESS.
In 2012, the Office delegated its representatives to 230 external business trips accounting for 302 individual participations.
Even 181 of them represented the participation in events organized by the European Commission (Eurostat) and 27 in meetings of the Council of the EU.
In 2012, the Office implemented 35 grant projects, co-financed from the EU resources, aimed at implementing and developing new
Moreover, the Office's staff operated as shortterm experts to provide technical assistance to Cyprus, Ukraine, Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina via missions in the countries of beneficiaries and through study visits of representatives of those countries in our Office.
One of the most significant visits at the highest level was regarded delegation from Bosnia and Herzegovina taking place at the Office from 28 to 30 November 2012.
The number of participants of external business trips by purpose
Internal registration number
Project title
Others 16 %
Council 9 %
International activities International activities44
Contracting partner
Contract
Co-financing by THE SOSR
Implementation period from-to
number
date of signing
date dispatched
cient survey management system in particular focused on data collection with the seniors of the SOSR.
In 2012, 957,5 employees (the average registered recalculated number) were employed in the SOSR, of which 331,6 employees at the headquarter of the Office and 625,9 employees at the workplaces of the SOSR in regions.
In 2012, based on the government budget and its chapter earmarked for the SOSR, the number of posts was curtailed to 975 employ
ees, of which 915 were to be for employees with full time jobs and 60 posts were reserved to carry out specific tasks concerning Population and Housing Census.
Education and age structure of employees of the Office to the 31st December 2012 is illustrated in the following graphs:
full secondary with A levels; 43,6 %
tertiary I. level; 2,6 %
77,6 % women and 22,4 % men were employed in the Office.
There were 133 head employees of which 70 % constituted women and 30 % accounted for men.
Within education of employees, the Office carried out educational activities endorsed in the Education Plan of Employees of the SOSR for 2012 supplemented by other professional
trainings and courses based on operative requirements of respective departments and needs of employees.
Last year, the education of the Office's employees was aimed mostly at:
 Introductory training and adaptation edu
cation of civil servants  professional training  language education
over 60 years 9,6 %
under 30 years 8,1 %
31 - 40 years 16,3 %
51 - 60 years 38,5 %
41 - 50 years 27,5 %
In the field of introductory training and adaptation education of civil servants, 41 employees took part in 26 introductory trainings.
Within adaptation education (13 employees), there were used various forms and methods such as: self-education, briefings including participation in various educational events.
Professional education was focused on processing of voting results of the election to the National Council of the SR, Population and Housing Census and the methodology concerning particular statistical surveys.
87 employees of the Office took part in 64 professional educational events at international level.
Professional statistical courses organized within the European Statistical Training Programme constituted a part of those events.
The objective of those courses was to improve required knowledge and skills in the field of European statistics, exchange experience and provide relevant information on the European Statistical System.
In the education of information and communication technologies predominated trainings which were the part of the project Electronic Services of the SOSR within Operational Programme Information Society (OPIS) funded
from European funds.
659 employees of the headquarters as well as workplaces in regions participated in 34 trainings.
Other employees of the Office participated in education according to their professional specification (e.g. legislation, management of human resources, wages, economy and operation, public procurement etc.).
4 690 employees took part in particular forms of professional education in total, and 1 398 employees in the field of information and communication technologies.
251 employees were involved into language courses; into half-intensive and intensive courses of English, French and German language.
In 2012, the staff took part in 845 educational activities including self-education.
The form of self-study was used by 303 employees in the total range of 6 197 hours.
Last year, the Office spent on education EUR
Library of the SOSR provided its services to 2 410 readers (of whom 1 875 were external ones and 535 readers belonged to the staff).
The library registered 50 titles of daily press and periodicals.
The purchase of professional literature, subscription of daily press and periodicals amounted to EUR 8 600.
In 2012, a significant event in terms of Information Systems Department was the Election to the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
The Office ensured information system by suppliers as well as by its own human resources for the whole process of preparation, processing, evaluation and presentation of election results.
In 2012, works concerning processing the results of Population and Housing Census, held in 2011, continued.
By means of application software for further processing of data obtained from the census and applying statistical methods for data correction and imputation, the Office prepared data sources for analyses and publication of results to the Statistical Office, Eurostat and the public.
For that purpose, work on creation of electronic outputs from the Population and Housing Census 2011 was initiated.
In 2012, within the Programme of State Statistical Surveys, electronic data collection available for reporting units on the Office's website was used averagely by 4 450 (26,1 %) respondents of the total average number of 14 950 addressed reporting units in monthly periodicity and averagely by 7 012 (24,6 %) respondents of the total average number of 28 479 addressed reporting units in quarterly periodicity.
In the field of information system development, the Office proceeded to the implemen
Information systems and information and communication technologies
tation phase of the project following the signing of contract on providing non-repayable financial contribution to the project of Electronic services of the SOSR and subsequent and successful public procurement and conclusion contract on project implementation in 2010 with a supplier.
The objective of the project is to introduce high-quality electronic services oriented on citizens and entrepreneurs of the SR by increasing the quality, information value, availability and transparency of statistical data.
The project is aimed at reducing excessive burden of reporting units during statistical surveys by introducing the principle once and not more.
It relates to elimination of duplicate data acquisition that is already available in information system of public administration.
The SOSR will obtain the data from public administration bodies involved into the national statistical system.
Information system will be based on the newest technologies and will provide users with more levels of tools for operations with data.
On one hand, the portal will allow access to statistical tables classified by subject areas.
A tool that allows monitoring data in hierarchical structures by subject areas, time or geographic presentation will also be available.
In case of user's interest, there also will be available an online analytical tool allowing application of basic statistical methods, production of own report or its graphic representation.
In case of interest in specialized outputs, user can use paid electronic service Specific statistical data acquisition where the staff of the SOSR prepare statistical outputs at user's request.
In this case, it is necessary to follow the principle of confidentiality.
If there is no access to internet in a respective division election commission, it is possible for the commission to complete the minutes in its offline electronic form and then to deliver it to a district election commission.
This change will shorten the time needed for processing election results and it is an interstage of putting in place electronic voting in elections.
Based on the analyses and proposals performed in 2011 arising from project requirements, in 2012, the implementation phase of statistical information system and election information system were launched as well as testing of both systems in order to launch their operation successfully in 2013.
In the field of information and communication technologies, the Statistical Office of the SR after successful completion of the project Consolidation of infrastructural services on the Microsoft platform (AD, Mail, Internet,…), progressed on the further expansion of infrastructure consolidation, namely in consolidation of client stations.
The project objective was to unify client environment for the staff of the SOSR in terms of operating system (OS) MS Windows and office package MS Office.
The SOSR is a participant of application of Microsoft Enterprise Agreement (EA), is the holder of client licence of type Desktop Enterprise and therefore it is authorized to update the OS and the latest versions of other SW components.
Microsoft products contained in Desktop Enterprise:
 Upgrade of actual version of the operational system Microsoft Windows  Current version of the office package Microsoft Office Professional Plus (the latest version)  Enterprise CAL suite (client access licence for actual server versions):  Windows Server CAL  Exchange Server Enterprise CAL  Exchange Server Standard CAL  SharePoint Server Enterprise CAL  SharePoint Server Standard CAL  Lync Server Enterprise CAL  Lync Server Standard CAL  Microsoft Windows Rights Management
This target we managed to fulfil up to 99 % and it was necessary to keep the remaining non-migration client stations on the original platform due to dysfunction of some applications of the SOSR on new basis and financially and also technically demanding transition to new versions OS and MS Office.
Implementation of the new information system of the SOSR in 2013 provides a real foundation for client sta
tions to update them to the latest versions OS and MS Office.
In the next year we plan a pilot programme of verification MS Windows 8 and MS Office 2013 in real operation of the SOSR.
The year 2012 was really demanding in terms of social changes as the special parliamentary elections were held.
The Statistical Office of the SR as an institution is responsible for collection and processing the election results and referendum, it was necessary to strengthen security measures to eliminate risks in the course of election to the NC SR.
ISIS
IEIS
CDB
PRODUCT
PORTAL
COLLECTION
PREPARATION
of survey and processing
SDB
PDB
PDB
indicators
transformations
ANALYSIS
DISSEMINATION
management
impulse
data flow
metadata flow
data, metadata flow
The limit of revenues in the amount of EUR 276 000 was approved for the Statistical Office
adjusted budget
approved budget
of the SR for the year 2012.
Non-tax revenues of the budget were not fully met and therefore difference in unfulfilled revenues arose for the Office in the amount of EUR 99 666.
Failure to meet revenue was mainly due to falling interest in renting of the Office's vacant space and also due to lower revenues from the sale of statistical data since statistical data are available free of charge on the internet.
In terms of the total expenditures, specific types of expenditures amounted to EUR 1 825 849 - Population and Housing Census 2011, EUR 1 529 925 - election to the National Council of the SR and EU funds and state budget funds earmarked for co-financing of joint programmes of the SR and the European Union, EUR 6 921 336 for implementation the project Electronic services of the Statistical Office of the SR that the Office deals with as a participant of the interdepartmental programme OP Informatization of Society.
Other expenditures in the amount of EUR 16 390 500 spent on standard statistical activities consisted of the expenditures on wages and insurance in the amount of EUR 11 618 479 (70,9 %), goods and services accounted for EUR 3 471 004 (21,1 %), current transfers constituted EUR 1 146 270 (7 %) and capital expenditures amounted to EUR 154 747 (1 %).
Expenditures on energies and communications, protection of buildings, maintenance of technical equipment and buildings and operation of motor vehicles represent relevant part.
Current transfers were drawn in the amount of EUR 1 146 270, of which EUR 1 050 840 were spent on contributory organisation INFOSTAT.
Other transfers were used on severance grant, severance allowance and sickness benefits.
INFOSTAT addressed tasks for the needs of the SOSR specified in contracts.
Capital expenditures in the amount of EUR 154 747 were spent on reconstruction of buildings of the SOSR, purchase of software and operating machinery and equipment.
Population and Housing Census 2011 (PHC)
Considerable amount of money earmarked for goods and services was spent on processing and dissemination of census results, publication activities, remuneration of employees outside an employment relationship who performed processing of census results, material and technical equipment and overhead expenses.
Capital expenditures were spent on purchase of software.
EUR 1 529 925 were spent on the election to the National Council of the Slovak Republic, in total.
Expenditures were spent mostly on overtime pay, remunerations and relating payments to insurance companies of employees participating in processing of election results.
Expenditures on goods and services were spent on material provision of professional summarizing units, telecommunication services, and technical support services and on agreements for work.
Other expenses in the amount of EUR 230 000 were transferred to INFOSTAT that ensured processing of election results.
Capital expenditures in the amount of EUR 50 000 were spent on software purchase.
Electronic services of the Statistical Office of the SR
Those resources, in accordance with their specific designation, were spent on purchase of computer technology, software and licenses, on payments for consulting services and project promotion.
To build the integrated quality management system of the SOSR, the implementation of the project Monitoring implementation of the principles of the European Statistics Code of Practice will be the priority over next period as well as the implementation of the actions taken for its improvement.
The implementation of the actions will contribute to enhance the quality and credibility of statistics produced by the SOSR as well as the credibility of the Statistical Office itself.
Another priority associated with the building of the integrated quality management system - to get successfully through external audit performed by the ESS (peer review) where the Statistical Office was chosen for one of two pilots of the above mentioned audit within the ESS.
The audit will verify whether the QMS of the SOSR is in compliance with the requirements of European Statistics Code of Practice.
In this context, much attention will be paid to innovative system for monitoring cost-effectiveness of particular statistical surveys performed in the SOSR.
In the field of methodology, the SOSR will focus on implementation a pilot methodical audit of selected survey and as an integral part of it, there will also be the evaluation of the results of self-assessment.
In 2013, two grant projects, which are aimed at data integration from more sources, will be completed.
The outcomes of them will be implemented into statistical processes in the following period.
As a key element affecting the quality of statistical outputs can be also considered the harmonization of procedures for the analysis of seasonal time series.
Therefore, in terms of methodology, the year 2013, will also become the year of training for usage tool of new generation for seasonal analysis - JDEMETRA+, which allows the implementation of the ESS guidelines for seasonal analysis.
These guidelines cover all key process steps for seasonal and calendar adjustments of time series and represent an important step towards the harmonization of procedures within the ESS.
There will be reviewed in detail whether all the data sources for production of statistics are necessary or some of them could be discontinued or their range could be curtailed.
The possibilities how to reduce response burden will be sought through communication with owners of administrative data sources with the aim of intensive use of those sources.
Moreover we focus on the preparation of the implementation of the ESA 2010 through gradual change analysis and quantification of impacts on particular items of national accounts.
Price statistics will be aimed mostly at monthly survey carried out within the methodology harmonization project of the consumer price survey for purposes of calculation of HICP and of the European Comparison Programme.
From January 2013, all the calculations of price indices on the revised weight schemes, which reflect the structure of particular sectors of economy from 2010, will be made in the field of prices of production statistics.
Priority task of foreign trade statistics will be to ensure the tasks arising from preparation of the project aimed at testing of the mutual
Further analysis comparing the real data with data collected from opposite flows will be ensured.
That forms of information providing on the INTRASTAT system is the most demanded.
Next year, the task of the department of foreign trade statistics will be to test functionality of ISIS for controls, imputations, processing and outputs of foreign trade statistics in cooperation with a solver.
At the end of 2012 the management of the Office decided to transfer processing of foreign trade statistics to workplace of the Statistical Office in Trnava.
In this context, it will be necessary to ensure in close cooperation with the workplace in Trnava the staff training aimed at the issue of INTRASTAT, its methodology, the manners of cooperation with reporting units, work with microdata and their further processing etc.
Workshops will be provided for reporting units since that form of data providing on the system of INTRASTAT is the most required and efficient.
An important task for the coming years in the field of business statistics will be active participations in preparation of the Framework Regulation Integrating Business Statistics (FRIBS) with emphasis on the requirements defined in packages of statistical areas.
In short-term statistics, the activities will be focused mainly on implementation of new metadata format NRME (National Reference Metadata Editor) which requires a transformation of existing metadata of all short-term indicators.
Methodological cooperation with international institutions in developing new indicators to monitor the European research area will continue.
In 2013, the activities will be aimed at implementation of new requirements arising from the changes made in Regulations and activities focused on quality enhancement and international data comparability will continue as well.
Of course, great attention will be paid to burden reduction of reporting units.
In the field of social statistics, priorities will be focused on generating and building up databases - completing consolidated database of demographic statistics in the time series from 1996 and building up definitive source bases from Population and Housing Census 2011 (SDB residents, houses, flats, managing and census households).
In 2013, the section will be working on design modification of Family accounts statistics which should be implemented from 2014.
Besides the regular labour force sample survey, additional survey on accidents at work and health problems relating to work will be performed in the 2nd quarter of 2013.
During the year, preparation focused on the implementation of International Standard Classification of Education ISCED 2011 into social surveys, starting with the year 2014 onwards, will continue within grant project.
One of the priorities will also be the preparation aimed at implementation the grant project of European health interview survey EHIS 2014.
Election statistics will be aimed at processing the results of voting in elections to bodies of
regional self-governments, which will be held at the end of 2013.
Besides this task, within the meaning of respective Act, the SOSR will continuously carry out activities concerning new elections to bodies of municipal self-government on dates determined by the president of the National Council of the SR.
In the field of dissemination and providing statistical information, the Office will be focused on achievement of marketing objectives with the aim to get to know costumers' needs and satisfy their growing demands concerning quality and complexity of products and services of the Office.
Attention will be paid to broaden contents and forms of products made available through the internet.
In compliance with the conception of new internet portal of the Office, products aimed at data presentation by new means allowing users more comfortable access to statistical data and enabling to understand statistics much more, will be developed.
New internet portal will bring catalogue solutions of statistical products and information and new user functions.
A new unified public database, which will provide users with a new robust tool for activities with statistical data, is one of the upcoming solutions aimed at public at large.
An integral part of the new portal will also be a comfortable tool for selecting and browsing metadata.
As an innovation, there will be a dictionary which will provide users with definitions of terms, indicators, items etc.
Enhanced effort will be devoted to deepening the good relations with various groups of customers, intensifying communication between users and producers of statistics which can contribute to the development of customer
Priorities in 2013
oriented statistics.
Survey on satisfaction of users with products and services of the SOSR, which is carried out via on-line questionnaire in two-year periodicity, will contribute to obtain feedback on needs, requirements and expectations of customers.
The results of the survey will be taken into account in production of new products, forms of their dissemination, but also in improving other activities of the Statistical Office.
Survey on credibility of the SOSR, which will be arranged by an independent external agency, will provide response how is our institution seen by public.
In order to raise public awareness about the role and mission of the official statistics, their importance for society and individuals, the Statistical Office will perform Open Door Day in the 1st half of 2013.
It will be carried out with the aim to inform the public about the activities of statisticians, provide information about products and services of the Office, the opportunity to obtain statistical information as well as present new Office's website.
By Open Door Day, the Statistical Office of the SR will support the initiative of several institutions which designated the year 2013 as International Year of Statistics.
The main intention of the initiative is to stress, by means of companies and organizations across the world, the importance and mission of statistics for a wide range of bidders-for researchers, entrepreneurs, policy makers, media, students and the general public.
Staff education will be focused mainly on improvement of necessary professional and managerial competences in accordance with Development Strategy of the Office for the years 2013-2017 and position strengthening within the national and European Statistical system.
Significant priority will be education of employees with a view to acquiring knowledge and skills necessary for successful meeting professional activities in particular subsystems and layers of new Integrated statistical information system (ISIS).
The main task of the Information Systems Department will be successful completing of the project Electronic services of the SOSR, staff training, remigration of historical data and follow up smooth transition of the Statistical Office on routine operations in the new system which will be carried out in the course of 2013.
The priority task of the Information and Communication Technology Department will be to ensure the application and technical support with an emphasis on information systems, which are a part of the project Electronic services of the SOSR, enhance the availability IS, improve quality of provided services.
Organizational structure 2012
Affairs and International
Cooperation
Department of Strategy and Integrated Management system
President' s Office
President of the office
General Methodolgy and Registers Section
Registers and Classification Department
Database Preparation Department
Organisational and Technical Database Management Department
Presentation
Technologies and Public
Strategy of Information
Systems Unit
Information Providing and Marketing Department
Information Systems Department
Comprehensive Publications and Regional Statistics Department
Information and Communication Technology Department
Statistical Surveys and Methodology Department
Database Coordination Section
Statistical Products and Services Provision Section
Informatics Section
Department of Crisis Management , IT Security and Classified Information
Organizational structure 2012
Department of Office Service
Department of Economic Affairs
Personnel Office
Vice-president of the Office
Head of Civil Service Office
Civil Service Office Secretariat
Department of Population Statistics
Department of Labour and Wages Statistics
Department of Social Statistics
National Accounts Department
Price Statistics Department
External Trade Statistics Department
Macroeconomic Statistics Section
Regional Office Bratislava
Business Statistics Section
Regional Office Trnava
Methodology and
Regional Office Trenčín
Industry Statistics Department
Regional Office Nitra
Trade and Services
Statistics Department
Regional Office Žilina
Cross-sectional Statistics Department
Regional Office Banská Bystrica
Agricultural Statistics Department
Regional Office Prešov
Thur Fr
Contacts
Fax:
E-mail:
Statistical Office of the SR - work place of the SOSR SR in Bratislava
Hanulova 5/c, P.O. BOX 18 840 00 Bratislava 4
Statistical Office of the SR - work place of the SOSR in Trnava
Osvaldova 2 917 23 Trnava
Kniežaťa Pribinu 28 911 54 Trenčín
E-mail:
Phone:
Fax:
Leškova 16
817 95 Bratislava 15 Phone:
E-mail:
Web:
Trieda SNP 75
974 89 Banská Bystrica
Phone:
Fax:
E-mail:
Werferova 3, 040 11 Košice
Phone:
Fax:
E-mail:
Library
Phone: E-mail:
Mo - Tu
Thur - Fr
Mail room
Phone:
Office hours:
Mo - Fr
Introduction
Priorities 2014
Organizational structure 2013
The year 2013 was an extremely labour-intensive and full of various statistical activities for the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (SO SR).
Besides the standard statistical activities attention was paid to various longterm and strategic projects focused on raising the quality and effectiveness of our work.
The most significant project was the Electronic
Services of the Statistical Office of the SR
which was successfully completed by the end of the year.
A great deal of attention was paid to the preparation of the transmission to the new System of National Accounts ESA 2010 and to the processing and publication of the
Beginning of works on the Development
Strategy of the SO SR by 2017 was also a sig
It was aimed at creation of products and services representing customer value, as well as at setting of effective internal processes, knowledge and systems required for the production of this value in the environment of significantly limited resources.
In the field of the Development of Integrated Quality Management System, we continued
in integrating the principles of the European Statistics Code of Practice (Codex) into this system contributing to further enhancement of the quality and credibility of statistics produced in the SO SR.
It was held on July 15-20, 2013 and it was preceded by an extensive, almost half-year preparation.
The evaluation aimed to review the proposed methodology and related tools which will further (2014-2015) be used in evaluation of statistics of all EU Member States.
The pilot evaluation was successfully conducted.
On various ESS forums, the Eurostat expressed special thanks to the SO SR for the voluntary participation in this project and highly appreciated its active and high-quality participation in improvement of methodology, harmonization of questionnaires and procedure specifications.
In methodology, we focused of integration processes of various data sources, as a precondition of further reduction of response burden, as well as cost reduction in respecting the growing needs for the content and quality of information of users.
Specifically, within activities concerning modernization of European statistics, the Statistical Surveys and Methodology Department participated in the European project of data integration from various administrative data sources into the production of business statistics.
The outcomes of the project will be implemented into the routine statistical production.
The employees of this department benefited from the integration experiences gained in this project and also in participating in another project measuring the effects of globalization.
The results of our participation in ESS expert groups were used for modernizing the approach to confidential statistical data for scientific purposes in line with the European standards.
In the field of informatics, the year 2013 was
devoted mainly to two significant projects
representing an integral part of the informatization of public administration in the SR.
Increased attention was paid to works related to finalization of the above-mentioned national project Electronic services of the SO SR and on preparatory processes of the new project Register and identifier of legal entities and entrepreneurs.
The technical part of the project Electro
Preparations of new statistical surveys for future periods were started in the ISIS and the IEIS was successfully applied in two rounds of the Elections to the bodies of self-governing regions in November 2013.
The project Register and identifier of legal entities and entrepreneurs in the National
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
nistration of the SR represents one of the four basic registers together with the register of natural entities, register of addresses and register of spatial information.
policy for dissemination of statistical infor
Publishing of statistical information was realized mostly by means of the web portal where users can work with our data in form of databases, pre-defined tables, electronic publications and other products as well.
The most important task was the launch of the parallel operation of the existing portal
It provi
At meetings with the existing and potential users of statistical information we focused mainly on presenting the possible uses of the new integrated statistical information system in order to increase the knowledge level of customers.
More than 500 people obtained information from various statisti
cal fields during this event.
The participants were presented the results of statistical work including the samples from production and organization of statistical surveys.
By organizing the Open Door Day, the Statistical Office of the SR supported the global cam
paign the International Year of Statistics and
joined more than 1600 organizations from 112 countries of the world.
The regular survey on satisfaction of users with the products and services of the Statistical Office of the SR which is conducted by means of online questionnaires was conducted also in 2013.
The results of the survey are published at the Office´s Internet portal representing a significant feedback on the needs and expectations of statistical users.
Employees of the National Accounts Section focused mainly on the preparation of the new Regulation on the System of National and Regional Accounts ESA 2010.
Transition to the new methodology is planned on September 1, 2014.
In February 2013, employees of the External Statistics Department provided six free seminars for reporting units which were attended by 150 people.
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
In short-term business statistics, the focus
of works aimed at meeting the deadlines of data transmissions during the implementation of the new base year 2010 and extension of transmitted data in retail trade and selected market services by another two indicators on employment.
A great challenge in this field was the completion of questionnaires by metadata for individual short-term indicators in a new structure NRME (national reference Metadata Editor) and their transition to Eurostat by the end of 2013.
By fulfilling this task, we ranked among the 13 Member States who sent complete metadata in a required structure and content.
The Office continued in publishing and dissemination of results and ad hoc reports
drawn from the 2011 Population and Hou
By organizing a conference entitled “After
the 2011 Census does Slovakia still need
Introduction
Main activities:
i) publishes the results of statistical surveys for the SR and individual geographical and administrative units, regularly informs general public about social, economic and demographic development, provides statistical information and issues statistical publications, j) organizes and provides project and programme preparation of processing the statistical surveys and determines the method of collection and technologies of processing the statistical data for statistical surveys conducted by the Office, k) manages, regulates and oversees collection and processing of statistical data at national level, l) comments on methodology of production, content and structure of statistical data and statistical information acquired by ministries and state organizations in performing their activities, m) obtains and collects external statistical information for purposes of comparison the situation and development of the SR economy with foreign countries and n) fulfils other tasks set by the act.
Identification of organization
Contact:
Identification of organization
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
A specific task of the SO SR is preparation and processing of election results to the National Council of the SR2, bodies of municipal self-governments3, and bodies of regional self-government4 and processing of results from the presidential election5, referendum6 and elections to the European Parliament7 and the population and housing census8.
Identification of organization
We continued in deepening the QMS of the SO SR
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
European Statistics Code of Practice (Co
dex) within the integrated quality management system (QMS) continued.
In July 2013, the level of implementing the principles of the Codex at the SO SR was examined
by the peer review, i.e. a group of reviewers consisting of representatives of the European statistical system (ESS).
Processing of the Development Strategy of the
SO SR until 2017 approved by the President of the Office at the beginning of the year, was also a significant activity.
The strategic objectives, aims and action programmes for their realization are focused on creation of products and services in a quality ensuring customer value of the provided products and services.
of the SO SR by another integration of the European Statistics Code of Practice into the QMS of the SO SR
We continued in deepening the QMS of the SO SR
ves are related to the setting of effective internal processes, knowledge and systems necessary for the creation of this value.
under optimally expended costs was suppor
The level of quality management system was examined by internal audits performed in
selected processes.
The audits verified conformance of the system with the requirements of the ISO 9001:2008 standard and the requirements of the SO SR emphasizing the fulfillment of action programmes of the previous development strategies of the SO SR.
Ideas for improvement resulting from the internal audits and other improvement sources were compiled into
the annual general Report of the evaluation of the quality management system of the SO SR.
What the last year brought in methodology
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Within the MEETS programme (Modernisation of European Enterprise and Trade Statistics), the Statistical Surveys and Methodology Department was participating in a European grant project focused on data integration from various administrative sources into the production of business statistics.
Integration of these data sources into the routine statistical production enabled the cancellation of annual survey of self-employed persons and assumedly these activities will allow further reduction of statistical surveys and the implementation of new methods for data processing.
In June 2014, it will be presented at the European Conference on Quality in Official Statistics - Q2014, by the employees of the department.
In 2013, self-assessments of all statistical surveys aimed at the entire process of statistical surveys including the assessment of their quality level from producers´ perspective were conducted and evaluated.
What the last year brought in methodology
What the last year brought in methodology
The Methodology Department participated
In the field of seasonal analysis of time series,
the most important activity affecting the quality of statistical outputs was the harmonization of procedures within the ESS.
Moreover, the new software JDEMETRA+ (test version) has been available for about a year bringing additional tools enhancing the quality and feasibility.
JDEMETRA+ supports plug-ins which enables the improvement of the application´s functionality without changing the original code.
The Statistical Surveys Department has been participating in the new software testing and has been preparing a guide and a training for the employees of the SO SR.
Another important task of methodology was the education of employees of the SO SR in selected statistical fields which was focused
in 2013 mostly on protecting the confidentiality of statistical data.
In 2013, except the
usual requests for output protection, this department focused also on the improvement of the access to confidential data for scientific
Based on expert group experiences, the department prepared in cooperation with other units the research proposal templates and a contract on provision of confidential statistical data for scientific purposes which have now been applied successfully in practice.
and code lists continued developing in accordance with their international norms and standards.
In cooperation with Eurostat, works continued regarding the improvement of the content of national Companies Register and the development of the Register of Transnational Companies governed by Eurostat in the system of
EuroGroups Register (EGR).
The result of this cooperation was the finite EGR 2011 population which was finalized and made available by Eurostat for statistical purposes in March 2013.
Project activities were focused on the second half of 2013.
In December 2013, the indicators on fast-growing innovative enterprises in the SR for 2012 were processed and submitted to the European Commission in order to monitor activities concerning the EU 2020 strategy.
Production of cost-optimal database
Production of cost-optimal database
However, also within the internal and interministry comment procedure of surveys scheduled for 2013, the following were identified and discussed:
negative priorities, i.e. surveys to be cancelled, reduced or simplified, emerging new needs; primarily provide data for the production of European statistics, changes in forms, surveys which shall be supplemented with data from administrative sources.
During the preparation of short-term reporting for 2013, proposals for the cancellation of the following three short-term surveys have been submitted: Ceny Les 1-04, INTRASTAT 3-12 and INTRASTAT 4-12.
The survey Ceny Les 1-04 was cancelled
Production of cost-optimal database
The two simplified reports on the delivery/export of goods INTRASTAT 3-12 and INTRASTAT 4-12 were cancelled in order to obtain quality data on trade of the Slovak Republic with the EU Member States via INTRASTAT 1-12 and INTRASTAT 2-12 reports.
In 2013, three regular surveys on annual basis have been cancelled by the Statistical Office of the SR.
The reason for the cancellation of Roč 3-01 survey by which tradesmen - entrepreneurs not registered in the Business Register-were contacted, was the supplementation of statistical data with data from administrative sources.
Similarly, in the MOŠ-MIS 1-01 survey by which data collection for the production of urban and municipal statistics was conducted, data are transferred from existing sources.
The survey on delivery services IKaP 2-01 was cancelled due to the fact that the Postal Services Statistics was included among negative priorities in the Annual European Work Programme for 2013.
The NSNO 2-01 Survey on small non-profit organizations was unified with the NSNO 1-01 survey as a common form entitled NSNO 1-01 Annual questionnaire of non-profit organizations.
The SASU 1-01 Crime and Safety Survey was not conducted because of the unfinished legislative process at EU level.
For meeting the needs of the national statistical system, European statistical system and the international organizations, data from administrative sources were used whose number was twice higher than the total number of statistical surveys of the SO SR (more than 200 sources).
For example the survey Roč 3-01 which was supplemented by data integrated from various data sources.
Since 2008 the burden measurement is based on obtaining data on time required for the completion of a statistical form and on evaluating items in forms (the number of items of individual forms is multiplied by the survey periodicity and by the number of reporting units).
By the regular review of data necessary to be included in statistical surveys, it was found out that the range of surveyed data was considerably reduced during the years 2008-2012.
They are compiled by the methodology of European System of National and Regional Accounts 1995 - ESA 95.
Flash GDP and employment estimates were provided regularly within 45 days once the reference quarter ended.
Data of quarterly accounts are seasonally adjusted in accordance with the regulations and directions of the European Union.
In the 4.quarter of 2013, the Eurostat carried out a dialog mission in Slovakia regarding the problems of Procedures of excessive deficit and debt.
Official tasks resulting from the official conclusions are to be expected in
Note: - CPLY- corresponding period last year - constant prices calculated by chaining volumes with the use of reference year 2005
Macro-economic statistics
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
The Macroeconomic Statistics Section prepared standardly for the MF SR a draft of gross national income estimates and data on compensation for small companies exempted from VAT and data on weighted average VAT rate.
Transition to the new methodology is scheduled for 2014.
The main users were informed about this change by means of specific seminars in the first half of 2013.
At the same time, in January 2013, works on another project GP 03-12 Improvements of Quality in National Accounts began.
Macro-economic statistics
held.
Within this project, the department participated through Eurostat working groups in the international ESSnet project for the preparation of pilot testing of data exchange between EU Member States.
In cooperation with the Information Systems Department it also participated in the project focused on the provision of technical support of this exchange.
Within the ongoing grant project mirror data on mutual trade with the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary for 2012 have been compared.
Methodological differences in reporting of electrical energy and natural gas between Slovakia and these countries have also been reviewed.
Code lists and a guide for reporting units were updated in accordance with legislation in force.
In 2013 the simplified reports were cancelled which resulted in an improvement of data
Macro-economic statistics
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Business statistics
Business statistics
By completing this task we have been ranked among the 13 member states sending metadata in a required structure.
In 2013, a regular three-year burden measurement of reporting units and the costs for the national statistical offices in relation to the requirements of the regulation were conducted.
In the overall compatibility assessment with the Regulation on short-term statistics, the SO SR has been ranked among the first category of member states with the best level of compatibility.
The annual structural statistics compi
led sets of the final indicators for 2010 for the financial and non-financial sector and transmitted them on time.
Data files for 2011 on domestic and non
-domestic foreign affiliates were compiled
and transmitted.
New structured quality reports were prepared for all the fields required.
Within the existing historical time series the values of all short-term indicators have been recalculated in relation to the transition to a new base year for 2010.
Other activities were focused on updating the PRODSLOV list of industrial products which is in force since the beginning of 2014.
An increased attention has been paid to the confrontation of statistical data with administrative sources in order to improve the quality and the predicting ability of statistical data.
Data were transmitted to Eurostat databases, International Transport Forum, UNECE, the Danube commission, the World Bank and to the joint information system EUROSTAT-UNECE-ITF.
were implemented resulting from the Regulation No. 995/2012 on production and development of Community statistics on science and technology.
We carried out another innovation survey within the joint survey of EU countries - Community Innovation Survey-CIS2012 including the pilot (test) module on strategies and impediments to meeting business objectives.
We also took part in the review process of the Frascati Manual by providing the required
Urban public transport
Railway public transport
information to the working group of national experts for science and technology indicators - NESTI in the OECD the completion of the methodological, testing and regular questionnaires.
All surveys in this field were realized in compliance with the EU regulations including data transmissions to EUROSTAT
databases, International Energy Agency and the United Nations Statistics Division in a required deadlines and extent.
In 2013 the statistics of environment realized the first official data reporting to Eurostat in compliance with the Regulation No. 691/2011 Coll. on the environmental economic accounts.
Data regarding air emissions account, environmental taxes and material flow accounts were transmitted to the Eurostat according to their deadlines.
Expenditures on research and development by research and development activities in mill.
Data on municipal waste as a sustainable development indicator and data on environmental protection expenditure were compiled and transmitted as well.
Current data from the field of environment statistics available from statistical surveys and administrative sources were provided in public databases and electronic publications.
In the field of tourism statistics, besides the main activities on the tourism satellite account a considerable change was carried out in domestic tourism data collection within the Labour Force Sample Survey.
In statistics of Business Consumer Surveys, the project of Business and Consumer Surveys was realized.
The main activities of
the business consumer surveys were focu
Processed information on indicators of the business survey for the branch of industry, construction, retail trade, services, investment in industry and consumer barometer were regularly monthly delivered to the European Commission in accord with the timetable.
Data serves as a basis also for short-term predictions of future development of the basic economic indicators including quarterly flash estimates of GDP.
In 2013, the Farm Structure Survey on Agricultural Primary Production was prepared for the sixth year in a row.
Taking into account the structural uniformity, the outputs are comparable between member states and countries voluntarily participating in these surveys.
In September 2013, in compliance with the EP and of the Council (EU) No. 1337/2011 an overview of the orchard production for the reference year 2012 was provided to the Eurostat.
Cooperation with international organizations
The cooperation focused mostly on processing of comments and completion of questionnaires on individual statistical fields.
At the beginning of 2013, the Business Statistics Section was completing the extensive methodological questionnaires on ESSnet Consistency.
It also completed and submitted questionnaires focusing on characteristics and definitions (Workpackage WP3-Characteristics and definitions) and on the target population, sampling frame, reference periods, classifications and their applications (Workpackage WP2- target population, sampling frame, reference periods, classifications and their applications).
The aim of the working meeting was to share with the SO SR the experiences obtained during the implementation of the Eurostat regulation in the field of price statistics.
At the same time, the Moldavians were also familiarized with all procedures applied in data collection and calculation of indices of consumer prices by the Eurostat methodology.
In April 2013, a bilateral consultation was held with the colleagues from the Czech Statistical Office on the problems of trade and services statistics.
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centre
The aim of the regulation was an establishment of a common legal framework for systematic production of demographic statistics of member states.
In the field of international migration an integration of administrative data sources into these statistics was continued.
Share of pre-reproductive, reproductive and post-reproductive population in the SR
Year
Age 0 - 14
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centre
30 multidimensional tables were created in cooperation with the external supplier and published at the website of the SO SR.
After the creation of source databases of the 2011 Population and Housing Census data dissemination began with the external supplier according to their requirements.
In 2013, the SO SR managed to fulfill two international commitments related to the 2011 Census.
For the Slovak Republic, approximately 80% of these data was divided into the urban and rural space, the rest for Bratislava and Košice.
The SO SR submitted to the OECD 8 tables with selected depersona
lized census data, including for example data on permanent residents of the SR by sex, age groups, country of birth, nationality, education, economic activity, employment and especially on permanent residents employed in education and health sectors.
Promotion of the census results has culminated in an international scientific conference entitled “After the 2011 Census does Slovakia still need another one?” organized by the SO SR on 20-21 November 2013 in Bratislava.
The conference participants appreciated the results of the 2011 Census and the extraordinary effort of the SO SR to achieve them.
Share of pre-reproductive, reproductive and post-reproductive population in the SR
Statistics on living conditions of population
In household accounts statistics, besides the
field data collection mostly for the adjustment of the amount of minimum subsistence, the activities were focused on redesign of data collection on expenditures and incomes of private households for the next two years.
Survey on Information and Communication Technology Usage in Households for the first
Data are available through public databases of the SO SR and as the publication Survey on Information and Communication Technology Usage in Households.
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centre
The publication Food Consumption in the SR issued annually by the SO SR evaluating the development of food consumption in the SR compared with the EU Member States, also contain data on food consumption for the year 2012.
Data on food consumption, are regular part of the situation and outlook reports of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development evaluating the market development in the SR for individual food commodities.
Statistics on wages was compiling quaterly information on average nominal and real monthly wage for the calculation of follow-up social in
dicators.
Annual data on the level and structure of wages by age, education and profession were processed.
Information on gender differences in remuneration, share of employees in wage bands, average net monthly wage and median wage were released.
Regional wage reviews by the place of work were compiled.
Information on wages was supplemented by detailed data on other costs incurred by the employer for work forces.
The SR became involved in a project aimed at the preparation of the complementary survey of the LFSS which the EU plans to carry out from 2015.
Enterprise statistics on labour provided information on the availability of the number and rate of vacancies.
We continued to implement the Eurostat grant project Implementation of ISCED 2011 - International Standard Classification of education used for statistical purposes.
Data on statistics on social protection, education, culture, crime and criminal justice, disability to work for disease or accident, non-profit associations, compulsory social insurance and statistical data on health were provided systematically to the relevant state institutions, international organizations and to the public database.
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centre
Demographic research centre
In 2013, the Demographic Research Centre (DRC) dealt with six planned tasks allotted by the SOSR.
As a result of that activity, there were three publications issued directly in INFOSTAT.
Two of them are analytical (Born Abroad and Residence of Inhabitants in the SR as an Institution of the State Administration) and one of them is prognostic (Households Projection in the SR by 2020).
Information on the DRC activities is available on the website www.infostat.sk/vdc.
The check of the DRC´s tasks fulfilment was carried out once a quarter.
All the scheduled tasks of the DRC were met by given deadlines, the extent and quality required.
Besides the scheduled tasks, the employees of DRC, as far as it was possible, were involved in unscheduled (current) tasks tackled for the needs of particular departments in the form of working documents, supporting documents, opinions and evaluations.
DRC continued to develop the cooperation with national and foreign demographic insti
tutions.
RDC has mainly addressed to the tasks concerning population prognosis.
Election statistics
In 2013, the SOSR ensured tasks relating to the new election to bodies of municipal self-governments (by-election to bodies of municipal (local) council and city council) and to bodies of regional self-governments.
The Statistical Office of the SR carried out processing of the outcomes for 18 municipalities.
For 6 municipalities, the President of the National Council
The share of valid votes cast for candidates for presidents by self-governing regions (1st round of election) - 9th November 2013
In accordance with organizational and technical support of the elections, it issued a methodology and developed a project of automated processing results of elections.
An electronic register of candidates was prepared from the lists of registered candidates, and it was made available on the website of the Statistical Office of the SR.
In the elections, the Municipal Councils for all 8 self-governing regions were elected.
round of the election for presidents of self-go
verning regions in 5 self-governing regions for
Saturday, 23rd November 2013.
In the run-off,
there were elected 5 presidents of self-governing regions.
After signing the minutes of the Central Election Commission, the SOSR published the final election results in printed form and at the same time, even to the district level, on its website.
Employees of the Regional Offices of the SOSR participated intensively in fulfilling all the tasks in the field of the election statistics.
s The cooperation between the SOSR and INFOSTAT is based on a contract concluded between the two organisations for the relevant year.
In the contract, there is taken into account the priority statistical activities of the Office and current needs resulting from customer requirements.
dated data base and subsystems REGIS and ZBER of the software for comprehensive processing and preparation of some individual tasks aimed at the transition to the new information system; “gross-up” for particular statistical surveys within Automated Statistical Information System; software in BLAISE for 2013 and 2014 due to the new information system needs;
methodological solutions - of Tourism Sa
analyses, studies and prognoses - of ba
Based on the planned activities, the Statistical Office focused its attention on the required portfolio of products for domestic and non-domestic customers.
In 2013, the SO SR provided the international organizations with 299 products in the form of various questionnaires, data sets and pre-defined tables from all statistical domains.
struction and Regional Development of the SR, Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the SR.
199 datasets were provided for the Slovak institutions together in different periodicity.
Obtained statistical information was used by individual departments in the social-economic development analyses of the society, management and decision making processes.
We serve customers
in total with the participation of 2 300 existing and potential users of statistics.
Especially representatives of the central bodies of the state administration, local self-governments, financial institutions, students and teachers of secondary schools and universities took part in those events.
Customers were provided with statistical information, its applicability and forms of dissemination of official statistics.
Some activities were focused on presentation of Statistical Office´s website, databases and explanation of methodology as well as presenting the concept of a new Internet portal of the SOSR.
One of the most significant activities of the year was Open Door Day organized by the headquarters and also by the Regional Offices of the SO SR.
There also were accompanying activities such as Statistical Mornings and Statistical Afternoons organized by the Regional Offices of the SOSR for various target groups.
The main objective was to promote the importance of statistics towards scientific community, entrepreneurs, policy makers, media, employers, students and public at large.
In the course of the year, the SOSR actively contributed to that initiative by organizing many other activities such as conferences concerning Population and Housing Census 2011 with the title - After the 2011 Census, does Slovakia still Need Another One? or by the promotion of statistics among pupils of basic schools and students of secondary schools who visited the SO SR under the International Statistical Literacy Project.
Similarly to the previous years, users were interested the most in demography and social statistics.
The frequency of requirements for statistics was affected by the seasonality; the most requirements were recorded in March, at least in June.
some information concerning European statistics.
Those activities were carried out on the basis of gentleman´s agreement with Eurostat.
The European Statistical Data Support Centre attached to the Statistical Office assisted in navigation of users on the website of Eurostat, in seeking the European statistical data in Eurostat´s databases and also in answering methodological questions.
Public sector organizations
State administration and self-governing bodies
We serve customers
Users were interested most in regional statistics from the area of demography (28 % extractions), labour market (24 %), business statistics (12 %) and social statistics (10 %).
In accordance with the Catalogue of Publications 2013, the SOSR issued together 75 publications in monthly, quarterly and annual periodicity.
Publications were available in format pdf on the Office´s website.
The following comprehensive and sectoral publications belonged to the publishing priorities: Statistical Yearbook of
focused on customer satisfaction with pro
ducts and services of the Office.
The most numerous groups of respondents were made up of students (32 %), representatives of state administration and self-governments (almost 20 %).
Almost half of respondents used statistical information for school and study works.
The total average rate of satisfaction with products and services of the Office reached 72,6 points.
The most satisfied were the respondents from the groups: associations, unions and non-profit organizations.
Respondents evaluated 36 items out of five areas, in which they have an opportunity to express satisfaction or dissatisfaction with particular products, quality level of services, databases, availability and timeliness of
sought information, clarity of methodological notes, quality level of website and products within statistical domains.
The best evaluation (similarly to the survey 2011) was achieved in services provided.
It relates mostly to user´s convenience, international data comparability, comparability over time and content, availability of sought information or products.
Comments and proposals presented by respondents were reflected in some suggestions which might be taken into account by the Office in producing and disseminating products and services.
Professional competence of the staff
Assessment of the promptness by which the requirements are met
Helpfulness and willingness of the staff
We publish periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography
The journal promotes the development of statistical theory and its connection with the practice.
One of its main missions is to promote quality and efficiency of statistical outputs and their applicability in various spheres of life.
The journal is published quarterly in printed form.
Contributions were accepted in Slovak, Czech and English languages.
The abovementioned changes are to help Slovak Statistics and Demography to be more open for scientific community, to ensure its better availability and increase citation of published scientific articles.
International activities
International activities
and the European Statistical System that have
been exercising an extensive process of modernization and integration of production methods for several years.
their coordinating role at national level and to allow to use existing administrative sources for statistical purposes in more intensive manner.
Alongside of those listed activities, the experts of the Office participated actively in legislation procedures of three crucial Regulations regarding statistics approved in 2013:
In line with the nationwide preparations for
EU, the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic reorganised the internal organizational structures, established the Presidency team and ensured language education of the staff.
Office´s staff actively participated in statistical activities organized abroad.
Meetings of the Council Working Group were attended by 23 persons.
International activities
They were co-funded from the EU resources and aimed at the development and introduction of new statistical methods and tools in accordance with the European legislation.
9 of them were completed successfully, the implementation of the others will continue in the following period.
Within the technical assistance, the Office provided expert assistance to third countries.
The major project, focused on the development of the statistical system in Kazakhstan funded by the World Bank and coming under the international consortium, whose member is also the SO SR, continued.
She obtained information about the ways of the ESS´s vision implementation and the integration processes in the conditions of the Office, about the ISIS Project and activities aimed at implementing the Code of Practice in Slovakia.
Working visit of the delegation of the CZSO
Human resources
Human resources
Age structure
Under the age of 30; At the age of 31 - 40;
At the age of 41 - 50;
At the age of 51 - 60;
Over the age of 60;
Basic; 0,2%
Upper secondary without Baccalaureate;
Complete upper secondary with Baccalaureate;
Tertiary 1st level;
Tertiary 2nd level;
After the 2011 Census, does Slovakia still Need
In 2013, the educational activities in the field of
information and communication technologies
The education of the Office´s staff accounted for EUR 41 000 last year.
It was funded from the state budget appropriations.
The library of the SO SR provided its services to 2 389 readers (of whom 1 862 were external visitors and 527 staff of the Office).
During last year, there were registered 4 476 loans in the library.
In 2013, the library was enriched by 596 volumes (of which 443 were publications issued by the Statistical Office).
43 titles of daily press and magazines were registered continuously.
Information systems and information and communication technologies
In April 2013, a new statistical information
Both information systems were used in parallel in the course of 2013.
The Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic is a member of European statistics, therefore a part of services is oriented on meeting the requirements resulting from international commitments.
For the purpose of communication with international institutions, the Statistical
Office established international standard
SDMX with the possibility of data mapping and data providing in this format.
In the field of information and communi
consolidation, namely in consolidating of client stations of the staff performing statistical data collection.
Financial results
Financial results
By the Act No. 438/2012 Coll. on the state budget, expenditures in the amount of EUR 18 950 291 were approved for the chapter the Statistical Office of the SR.
The revenues de facto reached EUR 666 057, of which non-tax revenues constituted EUR 181 751 and extra budgetary revenues from foreign grants accounted for EUR 484 306 provided by the European Commission with the aim to imple
Budget of expenditure of the SOSR in the years 2008 - 2013 in thous.
€ Comparison between approved and adjusted budget
Approved budget
Adjusted budget
Year
Financial results
ment new statistical surveys.
Adjusted budget of expenditure amounted to EUR 26 518 238,13 and was drawn on in the amount of EUR 26 515 092, i.e. to 100 %.
Specific categories of expenditure were incorporated in the total expenditure.
current transfers EUR 1 372 744 (8 %) and capital expenditure EUR 298 277 (1,7 %).
Current transfers were drawn in the amount of EUR 1 372 744, of which EUR 1 026 810 were spent on contributory organisation INFOSTAT.
Other transfers were used on severance grant, severance payments and sickness benefits.
INFOSTAT also addressed tasks for the SOSR specified in contracts.
Capital expenditure in the amount of EUR 298 277 was spent on reconstruction of buildings of the SOSR, purchase of software and passenger cars.
Financial results
Special types of expenditure
Population and Housing Census 2011
Activities follow-up Population and Housing Census 2011 accounted for EUR 957 938, of which EUR 435 968 were spent on goods and services and EUR 265 146 on capital expenditure.
Priorities 2014
To the end of linking data files from various sources through the text strings, the Statistical
It is a uniform and
data-consistent data source regarding all the legal persons and entrepreneurs who come into contact with public administration.
The completion of the RILEE project is envisaged in the end of the year 2015.
In the longer term, increasing efficiency and
lower cost of the development of data base
Priorities 2014
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Dissemination of current metadata supporting statistics presentation on the Internet in a clear, comprehensive and harmonized form will be promoted by using of new technologies and electronic services.
In mid-2014 the work on two grant projects aimed at improvement of national accounts will be completed.
In both areas of macroeconomic statistics we will continue in the smooth transition to a new IT environment.
An important task for the forthcoming years in the area of business statistics will be the active participation in the preparation of a new Framework Regulation Integrating Business Statistics (FRIBS) with the emphasis on the requirements defined in packets of individual statistical areas.
Activities in the field of statistics regarding sci
ence, technology and innovation will be fo
cused on processing mandatory prescribed outputs from surveys on innovations, their transfer to Eurostat and publishing the results.
The report on the statistics quality of innovations will
Priorities 2014
be elaborated in the new electronic instruments European Statistical System Metadata Handler.
Among further priorities in 2014
Starting with the year 2014 onwards, the results of the grant project regarding the new International Standard Classification of Education ISCED 2011 will be implemented into social surveys.
One of the priorities will also be the implementation the grant project of European Health Interview Survey EHIS 2014.
The date of the elections to the European Parliament was announced by the President of the National Council of the Slovak Republic for Saturday, May 24, 2014.13 Members of the EP will be elected in the Slovak Republic.
At the beginning of 2014, the Office will put into full operation the new Internet portal, including a new electronic data collection.
In terms of dissemination of statistical data, it will be important for the Statistical Office to prepare a unified public data base which will gradually replace the static data tables and data matrix of databases of Slovstat, RegDat and Urbanand Municipal Statistics.
By integration of public data base into the Internet portal, the Statistical Office will be able to provide the general public with a consolidated statistical data and metadata by means of the modern and unified form.
One of the major tasks of the Office will be to ensure the staffing for the following elections: the presidential elections in the SR, the elections to the EP and to the municipal bodies.
Regional Office Nitra
Office Service Department
Sector Accounts Department
Regional Office Prešov
Strategy and Integrated
IT Security and Classified
Information Division
Civil Service Office Secretariat
Office Service Department
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Trnava
Osvaldova 2
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Trenčín
Kniežaťa Pribinu 28
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Nitra Rázusova 9,
Office hours:
Th 8.30 - 12.00 13.00 - 14.30
Fr
Phone: +421-2-59379 301
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Žilina
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Prešov
Phone: +421-51-7735 224
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Košice
Phone: +421-55-6410 200, 201
Mo - Tu 8.00 - 12.00
Wed
Th - Fr
Registry Phone: +421-2-50236 475
Mo, Tu, Th 8.30 - 10.00 14.00 - 15.00
Tel.: +421 2 502 36 111
ANNUAL REPORT
of the Statistical Office of the SR
NEW ELECTRONIC
DATA COLLECTION
Content
We continued deepening the QMS of the SO SR by sharing experiences in implementation of the ESS Vision 2020
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
Priorities 2015
Organizational structure 2014
„How was the year 2014 from the perspective of the Statistical Office of the SR?
I can safely conclude that it was successful.
I believe that after reading this publication you will come to a similar conclusion...„
Development Strategy of the SO SR until 2017
A significant achievement of the last year was an approval of the Development Strategy of the SO SR until 2017 (Strategy 2017) and starting the implementation of their action programmes.
The Strategy 2017 is aimed at the products and services with the customer characteristics at the national and international level, as well as on processes, knowledge and systems necessary for the creation of these products and services at an optimal and responsible use of significantly limited resources.
The most important part of the Strategy 2017 are the programmes fostering efficiency and economy of production of the SO SR, i.e. modernised statistical action programmes, programmes supporting standardisation of statistical production and programmes supporting further development of the integrated system of the Quality Management of the
SO SR covering both the organisational level and the level of individual statistics.
By these programmes, the SO SR contributes to the implementation of the Vision of the European Statistical System until 2020 approved by the European Statistical System Committee in its meeting in May 2014.
Strategic projects
In 2014, 84 statistical surveys have been conducted in the new system.
At the beginning of the years a new internet portal based on IBM Websphere Portal technologies has been introduced by the office.
At the same time, the data structure published on the website has been consolidated and clarified.
The choice of electronic products has widened as well.
More than 1500 electronic publications issued since 2010, are available to users through the online catalogue.
In 2014, within the Operational Programme Informatization of Society the implementa
tion of another significant project entitled Register and identifier of legal entities and entrepreneurs (RILEE) began.
The RILEE as one of the four basic registers of the Information system of public administration will be a unique, consistent data source providing the actual reference data in electric form on all legal entities and entrepreneurs registered in the SR.
International commitments and international cooperation
We have succeeded in implementing the new methodology for compiling national accounts in accordance with the Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on the system of national and regional accounts ESA 2010 (European System of National and Regional Accounts) which is essential for further work with macroeconomic data for the SR at all levels.
We have also explained the issue related to the ESA 2010 to the expert and the lay public by means of PR events series.
In the field of business statistics, works did however continue related to the preparation of the common legislative framework FRIBS (Framework Regulation Integrating Business Statistics) aimed at integration of the whole production process of business statistics.
We actively participated at discussions and written consultations regarding the definition of an enterprise and commenting on the new definitions of cross-sectional indicators.
We regard the completion of a tool for calibration of weights and its effective presentation at the European conference on quality and official statistics 2014 in Vienna as a success.
It has been created in freely available R software and it is user-friendly.
Based on the feedback from Vienna we have established cooperation with the Austrian Statistical Office and has recently been presented also for our colleagues from the Czech Statistical Office.
Coordination of the National statistical system
The Programme covers the requirements for data collection from all sources necessary for the compilation of national and European statistics.
Progressive statistical methods, work with administrative sources
The managed process of standardisation of procedures, tools and methods was also continued in 2014 by the General Methodology and Registers Directorate.
In this context, the majority of statistical surveys have been integrated into the new statistical information system with particular emphasis on metadata sharing and standardisation of procedures from the preparation of data collection to their processing and outputs creation.
The aim was the managed statistical production process described by metadata.
Based on the approved Concept of the use of administrative data sources, by decision of the President of the SO SR, a new department of administrative data sources was established which in cooperation with the competent authorities is retrieving and making available the use of administrative data for statistical purposes.
Statistical surveys
closure of electronic forms of such surveys which in the older webStat system could be included into the electronic version.
These included the more extensive annual surveys Roč 1-01-Ročný výkaz produkčných odvetví and Roč 2-01- Ročný výkaz produkčných odvetví v malých podnikoch.
In the calendar year 2014, we ensured the collection and processing of the 2013 Farms Structure Survey including their transmission to Eurostat.
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
19, 2008 on farm structure surveys and on the survey on agricultural production method.
The aim of this survey was to ensure the complete and in a European perspective compatible information on the Slovak agriculture, structure of agricultural enterprises not only from the productional and personal perspective and the age composition of the labour force.
Further work was focused on the implementation of statistical surveys in the field of business statistics into the new information system.
The preparation, conduct and implementation of the collection of shortterm statistical surveys for the year 2014 and long-term for 2013 were carried out in the new information system environment.
In the field of External Trade Statistics Department besides the data dissemination with monthly periodicity and publication of definitive data, the works were focused mostly on integration of the INTRASTAT system under the ISIS, preparation and testing microdata exchange within SIMSTAT project and in the second half of the year also on flexibility of reactions and an increased demand for information related to trade with Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
In the field of confidential statistical data disclosure, it is worth mentioning that the preparation of the confidential data file from the 2011 Population and Housing Census is available to researchers for scientific purposes.
Testing results of the redesign of Households Accounts have been implemented into practice.
The scientific journal Slovak
Statistics and Demography have undergone significant changes (administrative, technical and also conceptual).
Dissemination of the 2011 Population and Housing Census results continued with non-standard outputs, such as data in the form of data cubes at national level, outputs in the form of grids and issuing the Lexicon of Municipalities and the analytical publication.
By establishing a Working Group of the SO SR on the preparation of the 2021 Population and Housing Census, the office began actively preparing for the next census.
Main activities:
h) co-operates with international bodies and organizations in introduction of standards and classifications in the field of statistics, i) publishes the results of statistical surveys for the SR and individual geographical and administrative units, regularly informs general public about social, economic and demographic development, provides statistical information and issues statistical publications, j) organizes and provides project and programme preparation of processing the statistical surveys and determines the method of collection and technologies of processing the statistical data for statistical surveys conducted by the Office, k) manages, regulates and oversees collection and processing of statistical data at national level, l) comments on methodology of production, content and structure of statistical
Management:
We continued deepening the QMS of the SO SR
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
tics Code of Practice (Codex).
Emphasis
The above-mentioned project will contribute to the further enhancement of the quality and credibility of statistics produced at the SO SR.
The adoption of the ESS Vision 2020 in May 2014 was an extraordinary activity at the level of European Statistical System (ESS).
SO SR reacted to the challenges of the
core area by taking part in the initial preparation of the implemented project for introducing a complex quality management system (TQM) in the ESS and made use of
its long experiences with establishing the integrated quality management system based on the ISO 9001 standard.
Participating in these works is very important also because the SO SR is one of the few national statistical institutions implementing a complex quality management system.
The approval of the Development Strategy of the SO SR 2017 (Strategy 2017) was a
significant activity of the SO SR in 2014 and
Strategy 2017 is focused on products and services with descriptions required by customers, knowledge and systems necessary for the creation of these products
We continued deepening the QMS
of the SO SR by sharing experiences in implementation of the ESS Vision 2020
We continued deepening the QMS of the SO SR
and services at an optimal and responsible use of the strictly limited sources.
The level of quality management system of the SO SR was examined by internal audits.
Ideas for improvement resulting from internal audits and other improvement sources were compiled into
This creates a precondition for
the perception of the SO SR as a reliable institution and its products as reliable.
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
processed files and ensure the description, storage and processing of these ADS in the ISIS.
Since January 2014, the managed process of
standardisation of procedures, tools and
methods from the preparation of data collection to data processing was realized within the General Methodology and Registers Directorate.
In May 2014, the Concept of the use of
administrative data sources (ADS) was
This department is responsible for making analyses of the obtained ADS and specify the range and content of the data acquired including the structure, format and periodicity and in selected cross sectional ADS, to monitor legislation including its updating, to implement changes into the
The majority of statistical surveys focused on metadata sharing and standardisation of procedures from data collection to data processing and outputs production have been integrated into the new information system.
duction of sample files and data processing from selected surveys in the field of busi
ness statistics as well as with the Social Statistics and Demography Directorate in the
production of sample files of households for social statistics surveys and has pre
pared a system for the calculation of their weights from the basic construction to their calibration.
A freely available calibration tool Calif has been developed and presented at the European conference on quality in official statistics in Vienna-Q2014 and have grabbed the attention of various offices abroad.
Besides the SO SR surveys, this tool has also been used for the calibration of weights in surveys of the National Bank of Slovakia on the financial situation and consumption of Slovak households.
The Statistical Surveys and Methodology Department will continue to deepen the established collaboration with the Statistics of Austria in the field of calibration of weights of social surveys.
Other priorities in the field of methodol
In the field of confidentiality of statistical
data, in 2014 the Statistical Surveys and Methodology Department devoted its effort to modernisation of confidential statistical data provision for scientific purposes.
Researchers requiring access to confidential data may apply for it in a simple way via the form available at the website of the SO SR.
These data can be accessed, inter alia, via the Safe Centre of the SO SR.
An adequate protection is an integral part of the provision of confidential statistical data to avoid their disclosure and misuse.
cal classifications and code lists continued
in accordance with the legally binding EU acts, international norms and standards.
A statistical classification of public administration expenditure ( SK COFOG) has been issued by the Decree of the Statistical Office of the SR NO.
257/2014 Coll. for purposes of state statistics.
A detailed methodology and explanatory notes have been elaborated for the users.
Moreover, a help desk has been established promoting immediate assistance to problems related to classification application.
A unique and protected 2011 Census microdata file has been prepared by the Department used for scientific purposes especially for researchers.
It has continued to actively attend the Eurostat´s working group meetings in the field of protection of confidential statistical data.
ries, the employees of the General Methodology and Registers Directorate continued to actively participate in testing the new software JDEMETRA+ within the harmonization of methods and procedures in the ESS.
What the last year brought in methodology
The most important tool for achieving this goal was besides the use of administrative sources the new Information System of the Ministry of Finance of the SR, from which balance sheets data and annual reports of business entities have mainly been used.
In cooperation with Eurostat, works continued regarding the development of the Register of Transnational Companies, governed by Eurostat in the system of EuroGroups Register (EGR).
This cooperation resulted in production of the finite EGR 2012 population, finalized and made available by Eurostat for statistical purposes in the beginning of 2014.
Within the project Improving the quality of national registers and testing profiling of enterprises, an active preparation began aimed at solving organizational and factual aspects
In 2014, the main activities in the field of registers, were focused on the project Register of Legal Entities and Entrepreneurs (RILEE) which is one of the basic registers of the public administration information system.
The practical experiences gained during the production and development of the statistical register of organizations the integral part of which were also legal entities and entrepreneurs, have been fully utilized during the implementation of the project conducted by the SO SR.
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
The National Statistical System (NSS) and
These documents shall be adopted for certain period of time which means that except the SO SR, partly ministries and other central government authorities shall be involved in the performance of these tasks can be carried out.
The act imposed the SO SR to publish a list of authorities which make up the NSS on their website.
The up-to-date list of authorities comprising the national statistical system is as follows:
Statistical Office of the SR
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of the SR
Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR
The European Statistical Programme (ESP)
incorporates methods, main fields and objectives of actions envisaged for a defined period and a summary of statistical requirements in terms of political needs of the EU.
The European statistics are developed, produced and
disseminated by the European Statistical
The ESS is a partnership between the EU´s statistical authority (Eurostat), national statistical institutes (NSIs) and other national authorities in each Member State in charge of the development, production and dissemination of the European statistics.
The list of these institutions is managed and published by Eurostat.
It includes the following list of institutions for the SR:
Statistical Office of the SR in the position of national statistical institution
And other national authorities:
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development of the SR
Ministry of Environment of the SR
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
important and necessary surveys were economic, without duplicity at a qualitative and comparative level.
Administration of State Material Reserves of the SR
The basic document governing the actions regarding the statistical surveys in the NSS is the Programme of State Statistical Surveys (PSSS).
This programme creates preconditions for the production of cost-optimal database, since the proposals for statistical forms included in the PSSS are annually evaluated by all parties concerned.
The Programme takes into account the compliance with the principles on state statistics, so that
Number of items 2013 (total)
Number of items 2012 (seasonally adjusted periodic fluctuations)
Number of items 2013 (seasonally adjusted periodic fluctuations)
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
The Programme covers the requirements for data acquisition necessary for the compilation of national and European statistics.
Re
e. the SO SR.
Since 2008, the burden measurement is based on obtaining data on the time required for the comple
Pursuant to the ESS requirements, the surveys CR 1-12- Monthly survey on activities in accommodation establishments and Ryb 1-01- Annual survey on catches, were extended by the required variables.
(total)
(seasonally adjusted periodic fluctuations)
The objective of reducing the response burden until 2012 by 25% was fulfilled, compared with the situation in 2008.
In 2012 compared with 2008, there was a decrease in the number of items of forms by more than 25% (25.67%).
Between 20122013, the total response burden, increased by 6.78% and the number of items in forms
by 5.08%.
Both of these phenomena were caused mainly by inclusion of modules with three-month periodicity into the survey Roč 1-01- Annual questionnaire on business statistics.
After burden adjustment by repeating fluctuations There was a slighter increase (2.79%) and the number of items decreased by 9.93%.
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
National accounts comprise a compatible framework for systematic and detailed description of the entire economy as well as of individual sectors and subsectors where all levels of the economic process (production, creation and division of incomes, their usage, accumulation and financial transactions).
They are compiled by the methodology of the
European System of National and Regional Accounts 2010 (ESA 2010).
The development of the national accounts system is in compliance with the new EU regulations and directives as one of the main objectives of macroeconomic statistics.
External Trade Statistics provide important input data for the construction of key macro-economic aggregates.
GDP in mil.EUR
Current annual data on GDP development in time series 1995-2013
Note: - ESA 2010 methodology - Constant prices calculated by chaining volumes with the use of the reference year 2010
GDP - current prices
GDP - constant prices of the previous year
GDP - constant prices calculated by chaining volumes
The annual sector accounts for 2013, regional data for 2012 and 2013, input-output tables (TDP) and symmetric input-output tables (SIOT) for 2011, in the full range of the transmission programme pursuant to the Eurostat requirements, have been compiled based on the information of statistical reporting, administrative data sources and additional information as well.
The standard autumn revision of data for the years 2012 and 2011 was conducted and released in compliance with the revision policy available at the website of
the SO SR.
Besides the standard revision, an extraordinary revision in whole time series starting from 1995 was realized due to the implementation of the new ESA 2010 methodology.
Deadlines for the transmission of national accounts to Eurostat were met, pursuant to the ESA 2010 Transmission Programme.
Flash GDP and employment estimates were provided regularly within 45 days once the reference quarter ended.
Quarterly national accounts data were compiled fully in compliance with the ESA 2010 Transmission Programme.
Data of quarterly accounts are seasonally adjusted pursuant to the regulations and directions of the EU.
Note: - ESA 2010 methodology - CPLY - corresponding period last year - Constant prices calculated by chaining volumes with the use of the reference year 2010
GDP - constant prices calculated by chaining volumes
EU Member States are required to provide data on gross national income and data on VAT.
At the same time, through the permanent mission in Brussels, a ques
tionnaire was sent to the Eurostat containing data on transition from GDP to GNP, including the quality report with all information on changes and supplements for methodological approaches for compiling the final GDP/ GNP data including the quantification of methodological changes due to the implementation of the new ESA 2010 methodology.
As required by the Commission, the solutions of cross-cutting and particular reservations made against the Slovak Republic in January 2012 were sent to Eurostat.
They were based on the results of two Eurostat missions regarding the problems of the Sources and Methods for the Compilation of the Gross National Income (GNI InventorySK) and the subsequent comparison of the mission results for all EU Member States.
In the second quarter of 2014, the Eurostat´s inspection mission was carried out in Slovakia on the third own resource of the EU budget- VAT statements for which the SO SR prepared a draft by means of data on compensation for small companies exempted from VAT and data on weighted average VAT rate.
Except the routine tasks of individual statistical themes, the employees of the National Accounts Department were dealing with works related to the grant project GP 02-11 Methodological and technical improvement of national accounts, where they devoted their utmost effort to the quality improvement of quarterly national accounts and TDP tables, shortening the deadline of regional accounts by one year and to the preparation of the future ESA 2010 requirements, in the context of the new table of the next transmission programme regarding pension schemes.
In 2013 various working meetings with colleagues from the Czech Statistical Office were held.
The scope of meetings was the exchange of experiences concerning the implementation of the new methodology ESA2010, methodology of foreign trade estimations including practical experiences regarding its use in the national accounts of the CZSO, discussion regarding the issue of tax updates (excise tax and VAT)
Besides the scheduled tasks, the employees of national accounts participated in solving current issues within interministry working groups.
Works in the field of External Trade Statistics
In 2014, the External Trade Statistics Department released with monthly periodicity new, updated data on import and export of goods and data on price indices in foreign trade.
Besides these significant
At the end of the year, Eurostat has launched a project entitled Redesign of INTRASTAT, involving the member states.
Its aim is to evaluate the possibilities of simplifying INTRASTAT and reducing the response burden of reporting units.
Employees of the External Trade Statistics Department participated on the initial discussions, the assessment of options is scheduled for 2015.
Meetings with the reporting units having difficulties with the quality and timeliness of data transmission were organized and individual telephone and email consultations were provided through the Help Desk.
In 2014, data processing has already been conducted in the Regional Office in Trnava.
Finally, reference should be made to the provision of data upon request either by customers, sectors etc. or through the information service ensured by the employees of the Macroeconomic Statistics Section meeting the customers´ needs with utmost care
process of questionnaire validation with metadata in a new NRME structure and their integration into ESS Metadata Handler has been completed.
In the overall compatibility evaluation concerning the regulation on short-term statistics, the SO SR was ranked among the first category of member states with the best level of compatibility.
In 2014, the preparation works regarding the calculation of index of services production began.
Also in this field, the SO SR was included in the first category of member states with the best level of compatibility with the regulation on structural statistics.
Data files for 2012 on domes
tic and non-domestic foreign affiliates were
compiled and transmitted.
New structured quality reports were prepared for all the fields required.
The quality report on domestic and non-domestic affiliates was elaborated for the first time in the European Statistical system Metadata Handler environment.
Industrial development of the SR and production sectors of transport equipment
Industrial production index Transport equipment CL
Industrial production index of the SR in total
Turnover of Transport equipment CL
Total turnover for the SR
Orders Transport equipment CL
Total orders for the SR
Given the fact that in individual industrial activities the decisive part of gross domestic product is produced, works were oriented mainly on data analysis of short-term and long-term statistical surveys and analytical works aimed at assessing the development of key indicators and their interrelations.
SO SR has continued to fulfill the obligations resulting from the international regulations and meet the requirements defined by national and international entities from the business, research and academic fields.
The aim of the survey was to provide information on the Slovak agriculture, structure of agricultural holdings, not only from a production point of view but personal as well which are compatible with the EU requirements.
The final results of the Economic Account for Agriculture of the SR for 2013 were released in September 2014.
Similarly as in previous years, the customers were interested in products from the field of agricultural statistics as these are highly desired information and interesting not only for the business sphere but also for scientific purposes.
Attention was given to the methodological definition of input indicators and on improving the quality of outputs by regular consultations with
Business statistics
In the field of housing statistics, activities were focused on enhancing the database and outputs on started and completed dwellings and for dwellings under construction.
In the field of transport, information, communication and information society
statistics, activities continued concerning the realization of all surveys, in compliance with the EU regulations Data were transmitted to Eurostat databases from all surveysUNECE, International Transport Forum, the Danube commission, the International Road Federation, the World Bank and to the joint information system EUROSTATUNECE-ITF.
nology and innovations, activities were
focused on the processing of results of the innovation survey within the joint survey of EU countries for the provision of the required outputs into the Eurostat Statistical System Metadata Handler database.
At the conference Forum of Engineers and technicians of Slovakia,
Total research and development costs
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
users were presented with statistical products from the field of science, technology, innovations and the results of the main key indicators for the last 10 years including international comparisons.
In energy statistics, an increased attention was paid to the implementation of surveys according to the requirements of EU regulations and to the data transmission into Eurostat databases, the International Energy Agency and the UN Statistics Division.
In the statistics of environment, preparations have started concerning the implementation of the new Regulation (EU) No 538/2014 amending the Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 on European environmental economic accounts by three new modules- the Environ
Within the grant project financed from Eurostat, a pilot setup of the module for the Environmental Protection Expenditure Accounts for 2008-2011 was realized.
Structure of visitors in accommodation establishments for 2014
Slovak Republic
Czech Republic
Poland
Germany
Austria
Hungary
Others
Works were completed regarding the completion of time series of tourism satellite accounts for 2011 and 2012.
cused on establishing a database for the calculation of business composite indicators in
industry, construction, retail trade, services and also for consumers, as well as for the construction of the synthetic composite indicator of economic sentiment which characterize the short-term development of the business sphere in the particular field and at national and international level they are used in realisation of prognoses on the future development of basic economic measurement including GDP.
Last year an increased attention was paid to the quality of output information which was sent in monthly periodicity, within the required deadline, in a prescribed structure to the European Commission, according to the approved timetable and it was published at the website of the SO SR.
The project of Business and Consumer Surveys is a part of the international project of Business and Consumer Survey organized by the European Commission.
In 2014, there was a focus also on selection procedure documents for another project cycle.
There has been a comprehensive and very intensive discussion on the forthcoming framework regulation integrating business statistics (FRIBS).
It aimed at ensuring a harmonized methodology and describing the characteristic of the content.
In 2014 a debate on the proposal of a change package for individual fields of business statistics was conducted mainly during the negotiations of the Business Statistics Directors Group.
In October 2014, a consultation was held with the colleagues from the Czech Statistical Office on the problems of compiling three new environmental accounts.
The negotiation concerned mainly the preparatory works, expenditures on environmental protection, physical flow accounts and exchange of experiences from the field of data acquisition.
Demographic statistics
The results were made available by means of the Census Hub application.
Similarly in 2014,
the demographic data consolidated pursuant to the single legal framework were provided for the very first time.
At national level, mainly a modernisation process has been undertaken regarding the dissemination of the processed data.
In 2014, basic data on demographic statistics, census, social protection, crime statistics and culture statistics has started to be released.
Social statistics and Demographic Research Centrerum
Within graphical presentation, the Population Statistics Department of the SO SR processed for the first time data on spatial distribution of population according to selected population structures also in a way that it created, a raster database of the population density, pursuant to the Council Directive No 2007/2/ES establishing an infrastructure for the spatial information on the European Community (INSPIRE).
The dataset Grid_ ETRS89_LAEA_SK_1K was used by the SO SR, containing aggregated data from the 2011 Census.
8 data and analytical publications of the domain demography and 4 data and analytical publications of the census domain were issued through publications.
In 2014, proceedings of the international scientific conference “After
the 2011 census does Slovakia still need another one?” was compiled.
In 2014, the statistics of family accounts
focused on testing redesign of data collection on expenditures and incomes of private households.
In the second half of 2014, a data collection on incomes, expenditures and consumption of private households in 2015 was prepared.
The sample survey on income and living conditions of households (EU SILC) provides a
comprehensive picture on poverty, social inclusion and living conditions.
Moreover in 2014, microdata and indicators were processed which are aimed at measuring quality of life and subjective well-being.
In 2014, the SO SR took part in a project Action Plan for EU SILC improvements to improve the timeliness and provison of regional data on poverty as regards the need of modernisation of European social statistics.
Statistics on wages, has been processing and providing quarterly information on the average wage in the economy of the SR for the purposes of calculating another indicators in the social sphere.
The appropriate business surveys were integrated into the ISIS.
The information on regional level of wages was provided in annual periodicity.
Development of the wage components by sex, age, education and profession was recorded through the sample survey on wage structure of employees.
Data transmission for the European statistical system was transformed into SDMX formats.
In this context, a grant project regarding the testing of questionnaire on working time has been solved.
Information on the number of job vacancies was also provided for the need of the ESS.
Labour costs development in 2000 - 2013
Total labour costs
Direct labour costs
Indirect labour costs
EUR / Empl.
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
It is an analytical and methodological publication, which includes an estimate of non-registered migration for the years 2012 - 2014.
Information on the DRC activities is available on the website www.infostat.sk/vdc.
The check of the DRC´s tasks fulfilment was carried out on a quarterly basis.
All scheduled tasks of the DRC were fulfilled within deadlines and in the extent and quality requested.
Besides the scheduled tasks, the employees of DRC, as far as it was possible, were involved in unscheduled (relevant) tasks tackled for the needs of particular departments/ sectors in the form of working documents, background documents, opinions and evaluations.
The SEEMING project was regarded as the project of high priority in 2014.
RDC was involved in addressing the tasks concerning population prognosis.
Within the project of Slovak Research and Development Agency (SRDA) - Human-geographic and demographic interactions, nodes and contradictions in time-space network, DRC participated in developing of Demographic Atlas of the SR within the.
In cooperation with the University of Economics Prague, the DRC issued publication 20 Years of Independence from the Perspective of Demography.
DRC´s staff are engaged in the pedagogical process at the Faculty of Natural Sciences of the Comenius University, Faculty of Philosophy, Faculty of Education, Faculty of Social and Economic Sciences of the Comenius University and the Slovak Medical University where they give lectures on demography.
In 2014, in the field of election statistics, the SO SR ensured tasks relating to the next election to bodies of municipal self-governments (by-election to the bodies of municipal/local councils and the city councils), election of the President of the Slovak Republic, the European Parliament election and election to the bodies of municipal self-governments in the SR.
The Statistical Office of the SR closely cooperated with the Ministry of Interior of the SR in preparation and processing of election results.
In line with the organizational and technical support of the elections, the SO SR issued a methodology and developed the projects oriented on automated processing of respective election results.
On 25th January 2014, the new elections to bodies of municipal self-governments were
held in 27 municipalities.
There were established 19 expert (summarizing) units for commissions of electoral districts and one expert (summarizing) unit for the Central Election Commission.
In the elections, there were elected 21 mayors and 9 members of municipal councils.
On 15th March 2014, the election of the President of the Slovak Republic was held.
14 pres
idential candidates took part in the first round of the presidential election.
The task of the SO SR was to ensure completely the processing of
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
voting results, i.e. from the processing of the Minutes drawn up by election commissions of electoral wards up to results provision at the national level.
1 185 (19.89 %) electoral wards, out of the total number of 5 958, took the opportunity to send the Minutes electronically to the Integrated Election Information System (IVIS).
No errors were found in 1 026 (17.22 %).
In the first round, the President of the SR was not elected.
Turnout of eligible voters was
On 29th March 2014, the 2nd round of the election of the President of the Slovak Re
787 (13.20 %) electoral wards took the opportunity to send the data from the Minutes electronically to the Integrated Election Information System (IVIS).
of them were errorless.
Mr Andrej Kiska was elected the President of the Slovak Republic with 1 307 065 valid votes (59.38 %).
In the course of both rounds of elections, the SO SR was gradually releasing interim and final results on the website of the Office.
Turnout of eligible voters was 50.48 %.
Candidates obtaining the highest number of the valid votes in respective electoral districts - the 2nd round of the presidential election
On 24th May 2014 elections to the European
Parliament were held.
29 political parties and coalitions, which were to divide 13 seats, had nominated their candidates for the Members of the Parliament.
SMER - sociálna demokracia (DIRECTION - Social Democracy) obtained four seats, Kresťanskodemokratické hnutie (Christian Democratic Movement) and Slovenská demokratická a kresťanská únia - Demokratická strana (the Slovak Democratic and Christian Union - Democratic Party) each of them gained two seats, Strana maďarskej komunity - Magyar Közösség Pártja (the Hungarian Community Party) Sloboda a Solidarita (the Freedom and Solidarity), OBYČAJNÍ ĽUDIA a nezávislé osobnosti (ORDINARY PEOPLE and Independent Personalities), Most - HÍD (the Bridge - HÍD) and the coalition NOVA,
of electoral wards to the IVIS was 981 (16.50 %).
Only final results were released all over the EU precisely at the same time, i.e. on Sunday 25th May 2014 at 11 p.m.
Turnout of eligible voters was 13.05 %.
The President of the National Council of
the SR declared new elections to the bodies of municipal (communal) self-governments
The municipalities forwarded reports with results to 5 electoral districts´ election commissions.
2 members of municipal councils, 5 municipal mayors were elected.
Election statistics
cities was prepared from the lists of registered candidates; the electronic register was made available on the website of the Statistical Office of the SR.
Elections were held in 2 926 municipalities all over Slovakia.
During processing the results of the elections, the interim results were released on the Office's website.
The turnout of eligible voters was 48.34 %.
During the whole year of 2014, IVIS was used not only by the Office´s staff to process all kinds of elections, but also by those ones who were interested in it.
The staff of the Regional Offices of the SO SR participated intensively in fulfilment of all tasks in the field of the election statistics.
Cooperation with the Institute of Informatics and Statistics
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
The Institute of Informatics and Statistics (INFOSTAT), as a research and development workplace of the state statistics, cooperates with the SO SR on tackling R&D tasks in the field of the state statistics.
The cooperation between the SO SR and INFOSTAT is based on a contract concluded between two organisations for the relevant year and in compliance with the Resolution of the Government.
In the contract, the priorities of statistical activities of the Office and actual needs resulting from customer requirements are taken into account.
In 2014, INFOSTAT was dealing with 25 research and development tasks composed of 42 partial outputs, focusing mostly on:
updating and development - of software
for business tendency survey and balance
of energy and transport; integration of demographic statistics into ISIS; integration of price statistics into ISIS;
calculations and constructions - con
struction of microsimulation model to determine the life cycle and management of household; crop forecasting in the new ISIS system; processing the Farm Structure Census according to Eurostat requirements;
analyses, studies and prognoses - construc
tion and balance of supply and use tables and symmetric I/O tables; short-term development of macroeconomic indicators of the SR; estimates of GDP and employment; the impact of hidden economy on GDP in the Slovak Republic; research of potential of BIG DATA as data sources for official statistics; the impact of capitalization of R & D on GDP according to ESA 2010; estimate of the number and structure of census households and jointly-managed households in period between censuses;
analytical outputs - analysis of retail
chains´ databases; life tables, population balances, population movement and types of residence, population balance and educational structure of the population of the SR; assumptions and estimates of undeclared migration.
The activities of INFOSTAT in 2014 are completely documented in a special report available on the Office's website in the part About us / Key documents / Annual reports.
In terms of customer service provision, the Statistical Office of the SR continued to implement the action programs set out in the Development Strategy of the SO SR until 2017.
In accordance with the approved Marketing Plan of the SO SR for the year 2014, a variety of activities was carried out by which the SO SR sought to satisfy the requirements of customers as best as it could.
The Statistical Office focused its attention
on the provision of statistics for domestic and foreign customers in the form of predefined tables and data sets, in accordance
with the portfolio of products planned for the year 2014.
In respect of domestic cus
tomers, such service was provided particularly to legislative and executive authorities of the state administration, of which especially to the National Bank of Slovakia (41 %), the Ministry of Finance of the SR, the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR, the Ministry of Economy of the SR, the Ministry of Transport, Construction and Regional Development of the SR and to the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
The SO SR provided the national institutions with 216 data sets in various periodicities.
Obtained statistics were used in analyses of the socio-economic development of society and in decision-making and management processes.
Monthly development of satisfied requests of the SO SR during 2012-2014
Year 2013
Year 2014
We serve customers
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
The provision of products for international and intergovernmental organizations was oriented primarily on Eurostat (79 %).
The other customers were particularly Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (ECE/UN), International Energy Agency (IEA), Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and The International Labour Organization (ILO).
In the course of the year, the SO SR processed, in total, 293 products for international institutions in the form of various questionnaires, data sets and pre-defined tables from all statistical domains.
Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic further
Technical depart
In particular, representatives of the central bodies of the state administration, local self-governments, financial institutions, students and teachers of secondary schools and universities took part in the above mentioned events.
Customers were given the opportunity to become familiar with the offer of statistical products and services, forms of their dissemination, as well as their applicability in analytical, managerial, educational and other technical/professional activities.
Over the year 2014, 46 events were
Public sector organizations
State administration and self-governing bodies
International and external organizations
General public and others
Press conferences were also the part of market
ways how to use them.
Last year, 12 press conferences, focused on current statistical issues, were held.
There were presented, for instance, the results of macroeconomic indicators in respective quarters, the results of the demographic development in Slovakia in 2013, the implementation of the new methodology concerning the compilation of national accounts ESA 2010, processing the results of the presidential elections and elections to bodies of municipal selfgovernments in 2014.
were processed and met by the Regional Offices.
During the year, at the headquarters, the department responsible for statistics provision registered 3 305 requirements in total, of which 2 841 were provided to domestic and 464 to foreign customers.
The most requests were asked by students and teachers (26 %) and by other customers such as enterprises, associations, trade unions (23 %) and public at large (23 %).
Similarly to the previous years, users were interested the most in demography and social statistics (35 %).
Compared with 2013, there was recorded a slight increase in the number of demanding requirements, processed in competent departments of the Office.
They needed special treatment.
The number of satisfied requests on the basis of the followign themes
Macroeconomic statistics
Banking, insurance, prices
Statistical infrastructure
Business statistics
Multi-domain statistics, combination of themes
Demography and social statistics
1st half-year
2nd half-year
We serve customers
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
The SO SR as a part of European Statistical Data Support (ESDS) network, established by
Furthermore, the Centre updated information published on the website of the Office in the block European statistics.
Activities in this area were carried out under a gentlemen‘s agreement with Eurostat.
Significant progress has been achieved in the dissemination and provision of statistical in
formation by launching a new internet portal
of the SO SR into full operation.
During the year, the portal was visited by 762 913 customers and the total number of pages viewed was the 4 648 268.
Databases of the Office were available to professionals as well as to non-professionals.
During the year, Slovstat database was visited by 7 862 registered users who made 128 626 data extractions/downloads.
Users were particularly interested in the indicators of macroeconomic statistics (42 %), demographic and social statistics (34 %) and business statistics (10 %).
Throughout the year, the regional database RegDat was visited by 52 054 users who made 67 664 visits and 416 476 data extraction.
The greatest interest was recorded in regional data related to labour market, demography and business statistics.
In the course of year, the offer of statistical products was broaden by two new databases.
Since October 2014, the database DATAcube has been available to users.
Publication activities of the SO SR were en
sured in accordance with the Catalogue of Publications 2014.
The following comprehensive and sectoral publications were regarded as key publications of high priority: Statistical Yearbook of the SR 2014, Regional Statistical Yearbook of Slovakia 2013, yearbooks of industry, construction, transport, posts and telecommunication, yearbook of science and technology and quarterly Statistical Report on Basic Development Tendencies in Economy in the SR.
The Office sought to make up the publications with added value comprising analytical texts and adequate data visualisation.
Such features are comprised in the publications: Facts about Changes in the Life of the Slovak Population, Population Development of the SR in 2013, Social Development Trends in the SR 2014, Report on Economic Development in the Regions of Slovakia, Sight of the Regions of Slovakia, ESSPROS - Expenditure and Receipts on Social Protection and Number of Pension Beneficiaries in 2012.
There are also other interesting publications such as: Statistical Year
book of the Capital of the SR Bratislava 2014, Gender Equality 2014, the Regional Capital City Košice 2013.
In addition, the Office issued 17 kinds of promotional leaflets from various areas of statistics.
The Office monitored whether that objective was
fulfilled through the Survey of Credibility of the Statistical Office of the SR.
According to the survey results, 61 % of respondents expressed their confidence in the SO SR.
Compared to the survey in 2012, the total public confidence in the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic increased by 4 percentage points.
We publish periodical Slovak Statistics and Demography
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
the year of significant changes.
The journal retained its quarterly periodicity, and it was also published in another form than just in printed one.
With three-month time-shift from the date of the publication, we started to publish on the website of the Statistical Office www.statistics.sk, in archive of the journal, a complete edition of the journal in electronic form.
This decision was met with a positive response from the professional community, which is documented by the increased number of users looking for information concerning Slovak statistics and demography.
In 2014, changes also occurred in the editorial board of the journal, which has 11 members at present.
There was recorded an increase in number of new authors and also new regular columns were added (interviews, reviews of publications, opinions, etc.).
As an innovation can be mentioned one monothematic edition of the Slovak Statistics and Demography with the periodicity once a year.
In 2014, that edition was dedicated to Population and Housing Census 2011 and was issued on the occasion of that international project completion.
Regularity in journal publishing was achieved due to harmonization of the editorial work.
In order to ensure the most efficient and reliable social and economic development monitoring, intensive discussions and debates relating to the future orientation of the European Statistical System (ESS) took place in 2014; they were reflected in the strategy document entitled Vision ESS 2020.
It will be implemented through projects divided into five key areas: identification of the present needs, the quality of European statistics, new data sources, economical and robust statistical processes, and communication and dissemination of European statistics.
Several new aspects of the Regulation were included, with advance, in the Amendment to the Act on the State (Official) Statistics, which entered into force on 1st January 2015.
cy of the Slovak Republic in the Council of
the EU; a key Presidency team was constituted and various educational activities were carried out.
The participation of the Office´s employ
ees in international events held abroad was
In 2014, 269 experts of the SO SR attended 217 such events.
The most frequent venue was Luxembourg.
As the second most important destination is listed Brussels with a total of 20 attendances where the representatives of the Office participated in the meetings of the working group titled the Statistics of the Council of the EU and by that way, they contributed to the preparation of the new European legislation in the field of statistics.
statistical offices of the European countries.
At the end of the year, we welcomed the representatives of the Czech Statistical Office´s top management headed by the President Iva Ritschelová.
In 2014, the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic signed 15 new EU grant projects and together with the projects from the previous period, it implemented, in the course of the year, 37 projects altogether.
Their goal was to introduce new statistical methods and tools.
The number of new projects by years
Under the age of 30; At the age
of 31 - 40;
At the age of 51 - 60;
At the age of 51 - 60;
Over the age of 60;
Basic; 0,1%
Secondary without school-leaving examination (baccalaureate);
Secondary with school-leaving examination (baccalaureate);
Tertiary 1st stage;
Tertiary 2nd stage;
In 2014, 821.9 employees (the average registered recalculated number) were employed in the SO SR, of whom 308.6 at the headquarters of the SO SR and 513.3 employees at the Regional Offices of the SO SR.
In 2014, resulting from government budget and its chapter concerning the SO SR, the number of posts was curtailed to 834 employees of whom 825 were earmarked for routine working activities and 8 posts were reserved at the headquarters for the employees carrying out specific tasks linked to Population and Housing Census and 1 post was assigned to fulfil tasks resulting from the preparation for the Presidency of the SR in the Council of the EU.
Education and age structure of the Office´s
staff on the 31st December 2014 are illustrated in the graphs.
78.1 % women and 21.9 % men worked for the Statistical Office.
122 employees held the office in managerial positions; of whom, in percentage terms, 69 % were women and 31 % men.
Educational and training activities were im
plemented under the endorsed the Education Plan of Employees of the SO SR for 2014, focused primarily on: professional training and linguistic preparation.
Participation in 65 professional seminars, workshops and conferences at the international level enriched professional work via exchanging professional knowledge and experience which could bring the benefit for both, the national and European Statistical System.
gral part of these activities.
The employees of the Office also participated in other education activities in accordance with their professional specification in the fields such
as economy, accounting, state property management, financial control and internal audit, public procurement, education concerning the payroll, human resource management etc.
Language training was conducted in semi-intensive and intensive English and German language courses.
The main objective of intensive courses is to prepare experts of the Office for the Presidency of the Slovak Republic in the Council of the EU in 2016.
706 training events were held in 2014, (representing 5 532 days of training) which were at
tended by 5 603 participants.
Last year, the Office funded the educational and training activities of the staff in the amount of
During the year, the library of the SO SR provided its services to 2 348 readers (of whom 1 853 were external customers and 495 the staffof the Office) with the number of 4182 book loans registered.
The library was enriched by 409 new volumes (of which 331 publications were issued by the Statistical Office).
Library made orders and continuously subscribed 5 titles of daily press and 30 periodicals intended for the respective departments.
The Office spent EUR 8 600 on purchase of literature, subscriptions to newspapers and journals and periodicals.
Information systems and information and communication technologies
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Information systems
In 2014, the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic launched the implementation of the pro
ject Register and Identifier of Legal Entities and Entrepreneurs (RILEE).
In the National
Concept of eGovernment of the SR, this register represents one of the four basic registers together with the Register of Natural Persons, Register of Addresses and Register of Spatial Information.
Reference registers will form a comprehensive and credible data source and their electronic records will be recognised legislatively at the level of official documents.
Register and Identifier of Legal Entities and Entrepreneurs will constitute one data source of legally binding data concerning legal entities, entrepreneurs, public authorities and selected organizational units.
Register will facilitate to submit entrepreneurs´ documents, as these data will be made accessible to public authorities who will be able to withdraw them right from the Register of Legal Entities.
Implementation of the project Electronic Services will increase the sophistication, quality and accessibility of services for citizens and entrepreneurs as well.
Established register will result in financial and economic benefits for business entities in the form of time and cost savings in obtaining and providing documents proving their identity; in that way, the register significantly will contrib
ute to reduction of business entities administrative burden.
As well as, it should entail saving of time and financial costs incurred when changes in business are reported to public administration institutions except the Source Register, which is responsible for registration by law.
In January 2014 a contract was signed with a consortium of contractors; the contract related to the development of the information system RILEE and consequently, the implementation of the project commenced in order to develop a unified, data-consistent source of data for all legal persons, entrepreneurs, public authorities and organizational units registered in Slovakia.
Other objectives include the provision of the current reference data in electronic form and the introduction of central services allocation legal entity identifier.
At the end of 2014, the first phase of the project - Analysis and design, within which a legislative analysis was carried out - was completed.
After discussions with the Ministry of Finance and other project partners, a document comprising detailed and functional specification, legislative proposal and integration manuals was ready.
In January, within the project publicity, a press conference was held thematically aimed at project launching.
Subsequently, in June, a workshop was held, where the project together with the legislative concept of source registration and the integrating project OPIS were presented.
Information systems and information and communication technologies
The mock-up interface was made available for the purpose of integration testing by the other information systems of public administration.
There were also initiated integration meetings with integrating bodies that were also subject to an agreement on integration plan implementation.
Works in the implementation phase will continue in 2015 as well.
The planned deadline of completing is October 2015.
tion to the project Electronic Services of the Statistical Office of the SR.
New statistical information system covers the entire statistical process; it starts with the preparation of statistical surveys which is followed by data collection, their processing, analysis, up to their provision to international institutions, public administration institutions and other professional and lay public.
The information system is oriented on reporting units through input electronic services in the form of building a robust collection application for the collection of electronic statistical statements and obtaining data from administrative sources with the aim to reduce administrative burden.
The quality of the data provided is increased via output electronic services by putting into operation Business Intelligence tools with the support of maps, tables and graph presentations.
The notification services about updates of statistical objects such as code lists or classifications are an integral part of those electronic services.
In 2014, 31 short-term and 26 long-term statistical surveys were carried out by the new statistical information system.
The new election information system, also
implemented in the framework of Electronic Services of the SO SR, was successfully used in collecting and processing of the results in the election of the President in March 2014, elections to the European Parliament in May 2014 and in elections to bodies of municipal self-governments in November 2014.
The Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic as a component part of European statistics production is involved in the project Census Hub, which is aimed at making data from the Population and Housing Census 2011 of the EU´s
countries accessible with the possibility of mutual comparison.
The project was implemented by using SDMX international standard and put into operation in 2014.
In 2014, the official statistics production was carried out via 15 different operating systems; the Application Support Division was responsible for their functioning.
One system worked to process the results of elections and referenda and seven other systems were in operation to process administrative agenda.
The most significant changes in 2014 were as follows: the introduction of the integrated statistical information system in routine operation; changes in the information system for the work monitoring and changes in the system for data provision to Eurostat.
Information and Communication Technology
In 2014, the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic carried out, within its financial capacities,
a modification of client workplaces that were
utilized in projects of election results processing.
In 2014, following the successful implementation of the client workplaces for processing election results in expert summarizing units on the LINUX platform, the Information and Communication Technology Department launched
innovation of infrastructure of elections and referenda results presentation with the empha
sis given on efficiency of results processing.
The new environment also utilizes OPEN SOURCE platform and also meets demanding security requirements for web presentations; it is easily scalable and it monitors innovative trends.
In 2014, the implementation of the ICT´s infrastructure of the RILEE project was com
Budget of expenditures of the chapter concerning the SO SR for the years 2009 - 2014 in thous.
€ - Comparison of the approved budget with the adjusted one
The limit of revenues in the amount of EUR 442 000 was approved for the Statistical Office of the SR for the year 2014.
Revenues limit was decreased under the budgetary measures of the Ministry of Finance to EUR 182 000.
The revenues de facto reached EUR 913 212, of which non-tax revenues constituted EUR 187 911 and extra budgetary revenues from foreign grants accounted for EUR 725 302 which were allocated by the European Commission with the aim to implement new statistical surveys.
Binding indicator - nontax revenue was exceeded by EUR 5 911 compared with the adjusted budget.
Expenditure on goods and services in the amount of EUR 2 725 302 were mostly spent on statistical surveys and statistical data processing, support services of ICT, travel expenses, education and trainings of employees, expenses related to the collection of statistical surveys, the amount allocated to the social fund, catering of the employees.
Expenditure on energy and communications, security/security patrols and guarding of buildings, maintenance of technical equipment and buildings and operation of motor vehicles represent a substantial share of expenditure.
Other transfers were used on severance grants, severance pay and sickness benefits.
INFOSTAT also dealt with tasks for the SOSR specified in contracts.
Special types of expenditure
Population and Housing Census 2011 (PHC 2011)
The costs for activities follow-up Population and Housing Census 2011 accounted for EUR 207 865, of which EUR 105 717 were spent on goods and services and EUR 5 120 on transfer to the allowance organization INFOSTAT.
Considerable amount of money earmarked for goods and services was spent on dissemination of census results, publications, material and technical support activities and overhead expenses.
In 2014, the SO SR processed the results of three types of elections - the presidential elections, election to the EP and elections to the bodies of municipal self-governments.
The costs for elections stood at EUR 3 184 177 in total.
Expenditure was spent mostly on overtime payments, remunerations to personnel involved in election results processing and related contributions to insurance companies.
Capital expenditure in the amount of EUR 23 855 was spent on purchase of computer equipment.
The financial entitlements to ensure the sustainability of the results arising from projects OPIS
The funds in the amount of EUR 1 419 000 designated for abovementioned purpose were incurred for technical support services of the OPIS project - Electronic Services of the SO SR.
E-government and development of electronic services at the central level of the MF SR - SO SR
The project Electronic Services of the SOSR and the project Register and Identifier of Legal Entities and Entrepreneurs, which are included in the Interministerial OP Information Society were funded from the European Union´s funds as well as from appropriations from the state budget, which were incurred for co-financing of joint programmes of the SR and the EU, in the total amount of EUR 4 266 330.78.
The European Union funds constituted EUR 3 212 973.75 and the state budget on co-financing accounted for EUR 1 053 357.03.
In the coming period, development of an in
tegrated quality management system will be
focus on the continuing implementation of the requirements of the European Statistics Code of Practice into integrated QMS of the SOSR with the emphasis on the issues discussed and recommended within the peer review.
In connection with the implementation of Vision 2020 ESS, the most important activities within the issues concerning the quality, will be active participation in the project aimed at comprehensive establishment of the ESS´s quality management.
As a priority, in connection with assessment of the level of quality management system of the SO SR implementation, re-certification of the system by the certification body with international accreditation will be performed in October 2015.
An important priority in the development of that system will be ongoing implementation of the action programmes of the Development Strategy of the SO SR until the year 2017.
Emphasis will be put on implementation of those projects which contribute to the effectiveness and efficiency of the SO SR, i.e. on implementation of projects towards modernisation, programmes aimed at standardisation of statistical production and programmes promoting their realisation.
Particular attention will be paid to programmes that support projects for the implementation of the ESS in Vision 2020.
In 2015, the consolidation and harmonization of the different categories of metadata, as a logical part of the national project Electronic Services of the SO SR, will be continuing.
Further statistical surveys will be integrated into the new information system.
One of the key priorities will be the dissemination of current metadata supporting the presentation of statistics on the Internet in a clear, comprehensive and harmonized form.
Activities will be mainly focused on the creation of quality reports to users within the structure of ESMS (Euro SDMX metadata structure) that will provide information useful for the evaluation the quality of data and the whole process of national statistical products.
In 2015, in the field of classifications and nomenclatures, the main attention will be paid to their harmonisation with the legally bind
ing acts of the European Union, international norms and standards.
In the field of statistical registers, emphasis will be put on the active preparation associated with organizational and factual side of enterprises´ specialization/business profile according to the new proposed definition which has been prepared under the European Framework Regulation Integrating Business Statistics FRIBS.
An integral part of this preparation will also be to allow the access to new, specific data sources that are obtained traditionally by the European statistical institutions from private providers.
In 2015, as the key activities will be regarded activities associated with the project Register of Legal Entities and Entrepreneurs, which enters the phase of testing and verification in the 2nd quarter of the year.
In the longer term, attention will be paid to the
effectiveness improvement and cost reduction in creating database by data integration
The priority of every year is to examine the requirements for the Programme of State Statistical Surveys with a view to carrying out important and necessary surveys, in compliance with the principles of efficiency and without duplicates.
Activities in the area of macro-economic statistics will be primarily focused on the preparation of source groundwork to ensure data, for which the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic was allowed the derogations in the
context of fulfilling Transmission Programme ESA 2010, other activities will be focused on preparation of a new description of the sources and methods for the compilation of gross national income according to ESA 2010, on preparation a smooth transition to the new IT environment, the finalisation of the grant project concerning the provision of basic information on purchasing power parities and preparation for testing microdata exchange of the foreign trade statistics within the project SIMSTAT.
In the area of business statistics, there is defined as priority task the active participation in the preparation of a new Framework Regula
tion Integrating Business Statistics (FRIBS) with the emphasis on the requirements defined in packets for respective statistical areas and fully implementation of the definition “statistical unit of the enterprise” within the meaning of the current Regulation (EEC) No. 696/93 on statistical units.
Priorities 2015
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
In the field of energy statistics, there is being prepared the EU Regulation which should replace the Directive on prices of electricity and natural gas for final consumers.
We intend to be actively involved in the process of commenting on the forthcoming Regulation as well as of its implementation.
Under the grant project of Eurostat, the statistics of energy and environment statistics will be focused on setting up a pilot module for the account of the physical flows of energy.
After completing Frascati Manual revision, the
statistics of the science, technique an innova
tion will be dealing with implementation of the new handbook's recommendations.
In the field of the innovation, the works will be focused on preparation and realization of surveys by introducing of new indicators and alternations under a specimen Eurostat´s questionnaire.
In the statistics of tourism, Tourism Satellite Account and the publication of informative report for the year 2012 remain as top priorities.
In the accommodation statistics, it will be the release of a new monthly publication concerning the tourism development.
One of the main priorities of price statistics will be to ensure electronic data collection of consumer prices and prices of production statistics.
sulted from current social needs and processes in searching new ways, respectively solutions in the field of population statistics.
In terms of international commitments, priorities include the fulfilment of the Regulation on European demographic statistics, in 2015 with a focus on Article 8, carrying out „feasibility study“ concerning the usage of the definition „habitual residence“ in the context of population and events of vital statistics.
The effort made for simplification and improvement the availability of demographic statistics, which is one of the most voluminous but also desirable statistical domains as regards users, will be reflected in further development and optimization of the system for data dissemination.
The priorities of the year 2015 in the field of living standards are, besides the implementation of statistical surveys and the grant projects under the regulations and requirements of Eurostat, realization of data collection on revenues, expenditures and consumption of private households in 2015, according to the new design which was tested in the previous years.
The most significant outcome will be the processing and transmission of data concerning the EU SILC 2014 to Eurostat.
In the field of labour and wages statistics, the
The major and long-term goal in publishing
Slovak Statistics and Demography periodical
is to keep its establishment in the international citation databases.
One of very important priorities is the preparedness of the Office for elections to the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
In terms of the dissemination and provision
Owing to the integration of public database into the internet portal, the Statistical Office of the SR will be able to provide public at large with consolidated statistical data and metadata in modern and unified form.
In accordance with the Marketing Plan for the year 2015, activities for promotion and intensification of good relations with different groups of customers will be carried out.
The Office will enhance communication with selected groups of customers.
The comments, remarks and recommendations should be the source of valuable ideas which could be taken into account by the Office and where appropriate, they will be benefited in production and dissemination of products and services.
In connection with the World Statistics Day, which was established by the United Nations for the 20th October 2015, the Office will ensure a number of activities.
One of them is Open Door Day which will be held at the headquarters and at the Regional Offices of the SO SR.
The objective is to inform the public with the mission and the tasks of the official statistics as well as to present achievements of the SO SR.
The major challenge for human resources management is how to motivate the employees to meet challenging tasks and satisfy the needs of customers at high level quality while applying austerity measures and limited staff capacity.
In complex conditions and terms, the Office will endeavour to do everything to stabilize the key, productive, efficient and hands-on personnel.
One of the major tasks of the Office will be to ensure the staffing for the referendum and fulfilment of tasks related to Slovakia‘s Presidency in the Council of the EU.
The focus will be put on professional education, training in communication and language preparation of selected experts of the Office designated for the fulfilment of the tasks associated with the Presidency of the Slovak Republic in the Council of the EU in 2016.
A priority task of Information-Communica
Another priority will be to ensure the collection and processing of the results of elections and referendums in 2015 in terms of technical support throughout the process.
as of Dec.
31 2014
Organizational structure
as of Dec.
31 2014
Telephone: +421-2-50236 111
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Bratislava Hanulova 5/c,
Telephone: +421-2-69250 101, 2-69297 101 Fax:
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Trnava
Telephone: +421-33-5566 111
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Trenčín
Telephone: +421-32-7460 111
Telephone: +421-37-7752 200, 37-7752 201 Fax:
Information Service and Store of the SO SR
Telephone: +421-2-50236 335
Thur
Reception Telephone: +421-2-50236 222
Institute of Informatics and Statistics - INFOSTAT
Telephone: +421-2-59379 301
Telephone: +421-41-5113 201, 41-5626 649
Telephone: +421-48-4323 111
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Prešov Plzenská 2,
Telephone: +421-51-7735 224
Telephone: +421-55-6410 200, 201
Telephone: +421-2-50236 768
Thur - Fr 8.00 - 12.00
Registry Telephone: +421-2-50236 475
Mo, Tu, Thur 8.30 - 10.00 14.00 - 15.00
Statistical Office of the SR Miletičova 3 824 67 Bratislava Slovak Republic
of the Statistical Office of the SR 2016
We continue in developing the QMS of the SO SR by implementing the ISO 9001:2015 standard
Macroeconomic statistics
We publish the Journal Slovak Statistics and Demography
Priorities 2017
Organizational structure 2016
Within modernisation of price statistics, a new term “scanner data” has emerged, a complex electronic data capture was launched and the Register of Legal Entities has been declared a reference register.
The results of the elections to the National Council of the Slovak Republic were processed via the Integrated Election Information System and the concept of the 2021 Population and Housing Census which will be a combined use of administrative data and field surveys has been prepared.
This is one way of characterising the most important milestones of 2016 from the perspective of the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (SO SR).
Alexander Ballek President of the Statistical Office of the SR
Successful presidency
During the Slovak Presidency of the Council of the EU, the SO SR has been chairing the meetings of the Council Working Party on Statistics, where two Commission legislative proposalsthe integrated regulation for European statistics on persons and households (IESS) and the proposal for the extension of the European Statistical Programme until 2020, have been discussed.
The results of the work carried out by the Presidency Team were assessed positively by the highest representatives of Eurostat.
European Statistics Day
In connection with the declaration of the first European Statistics Day, various activities were organized by the Office in order to raise awareness of official statistics.
One of these was the conference Statistics- A mirror of society.
The event was held under the patronage of Eurostat and it was focused on the Office´s relations as a producer of official statistics with their users from scientific and scholarly community, state and local government, banking sector, business sphere and the media.
Electronic data capture is self-evident
Since the beginning of 2016, electronic data capture is mandatory for all reporting units (legal entities, entrepreneurs).
Electronization of processes led to administrative burden reduction and enabled the harmonisation of deadlines for the submission of certain statistical forms with the deadlines to submit VAT statements or income tax.
It enabled the reporting units to gain greater comfort in completion of statistical return forms and it resulted in improvement of data processing as well.
RLE is a reference register
The Register of Legal Entities (RLE) has been declared a reference register by enrolling in a list of reference data, managed by the Deputy Prime Minister´s Office for Investments and Informatization of the Slovak Republic, applicable from 16 May 2016.
By declaring it a reference, the RLE became an obligatory data source on legal entities for other public authorities.
Elections to the National Council of the Slovak Republic processed in IEIS
In March 2016, elections to the National Council of the SR took place whose results were processed comprehensively, for the first time, in the Integrated Election Information system (IEIS).
Despite the proven hacking attacks on the communication network, the processing of the election results was not threatened or suspended.
The 2021 Census will be integrated
One of the priority projects of 2016, was the preparation for the 2021 Population and Housing Census.
The activities undertaken included definition of the objective of the census, its conceptual design, information intended for the government on the 2021 Census preparations (August 2016), analysis of selected administrative sources, methodology and proposals for their integration, preparation of the Action Plan´s draft for 2017 - 2020 and other activities.
Updated ESA 2010 methodology
It is therefore a basis for the legality assessment of the used procedures in the new verification cycle, launched by Eurostat in autumn 2016 in the context of GNI-based fourth EU own resource.
Farm Structure Survey
In the field of agricultural statistics, we focused on the preparation of the Farm Structure Survey 2016, conducted tri-annually on the basis of equal methodology for all EU Member States.
This survey aims at ensuring complete information on the Slovak agriculture, compatible with the requirements of European legislation, necessary for creating a single framework for the production of comparable statistics on the structure of agricultural holdings and agricultural production methods.
Scanner Data as prognostication of the further development of the official statistics
One of the Office´s modernisation activities is the use of transaction data (so-called scanner data) for the calculation of consumer price index.
Scanner data are directly obtained from traders, containing information on prices, the quantity of goods sold and turnovers for individual products.
These data can complement or completely replace the traditional data collection for prices and serve as a basis for the calculation of price indices.
In parallel to negotiations, the methodology has been produced and the suitable IT solutions for data procession and implementation have been sought, obtained into the statistical production from supermarket chains.
The roles of the statistical office within the 2030 Agenda
It is a sustainable development agenda which is not focusing solely on aid for developing countries, for the first time in history, but drawing attention to the planet Earth as a whole.
Subsequently in March 2016, the UN Statistical Commission endorsed a global list of 241 indicators to measure progress towards the targets.
Under the SR Government Decree, the SO SR was tasked with ensuring the production of sustainable development indicators in line with the production of the European Statistical System and cooperation in monitoring of these indicators.
In December 2016, the SO SR issued a publication Slovak Republic and the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda.
Integrated Management
The overall compliance of the implemented QMS with the ISO 9001:2008 was examined by the first surveillance audit in this certification period, performed by the monitoring organization Bureau Veritas Slovakia, spol. s.r.o. in October 2016.
The positive audit result reaffirmed the SO SR´s ability to provide statistical products and services consistently fulfilling the needs of customers, respective regulations as well as the SO SR itself.
This confirms the fulfilment of one of the primary precondition for the perception of the Office as a reliable institution and its products and services as credible outputs.
SO SR1: a) develops and publishes the policy of national statistics, b) compiles the Programme of State Statistical Surveys in co-operation with ministries and state organizations c) defines methodology of statistical surveys and collects and processes statistical data, d) defines methodology for maintenance of the system of national accounts and compiles national accounts, e) sets up, releases and keeps classifications, nomenclatures and registers in co-operation with the ministries and state authorities, f) defines the method of setting up the registers, assigns and issues identification numbers, g) elaborates analyses of selected characteristics of the social, economic and environmental development of the SR, h) co-operates with international bodies and organizations in introduction of standards and classifications in the field of statistics, i) publishes the results of statistical surveys
for the SR and individual geographical and administrative units, regularly informs general public about social, economic and demographic development, provides statistical information and issues statistical publications, j) organizes and provides project and programme preparation of processing the statistical surveys and determines the method of collection and technologies of processing the statistical data for statistical surveys conducted by the Office, k) manages, regulates and oversees collection and processing of statistical data at national level, l) comments on methodology of production, content and structure of statistical data and statistical information acquired by ministries and state organizations in performing their activities, m) obtains and collects external statistical information for purposes of comparison the situation and development of the SR economy with foreign countries and n) fulfils other tasks set by the act.
Identiﬁcation of organization
telephone (operator) +421 2 50236 211 internet
http://www.statistics.sk Management: The Statistical Office is a budgetary organization with its incomes and expenditures being a part of the state budget of the Slovak Republic
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Last year, further deepening of the SO SR´s
All these have been introduced into practice via the implementation of revised descriptions of processes, risk management measures as risk analysis outputs as well as via new approaches ensuring competencies necessary for the realisation of modern statistical production.
Within the environment of limited resources, the implementation of the Development Stra
Important programmes covering the field of the 2021 Population and Housing Census and the 2030 Agenda were included in response to changes in the external environment.
In connection with the introduction of the new ISO 9001:2015 standard, the realization of the strategic action programme has come to the fore which aimed at the compilation of competency matrices for the employees working in
the field of statistics as a precondition for efficient increase of the educational process of the SO SR, as well as the realisation of the programme creating favourable electronic environment for knowledge sharing in the SO SR.
Within the implementation of the Development Strategy of the SO SR until 2017, continued attention was paid to the action programmes which are part of the implementation
projects of the Vision of the European Statistical System (ESS) until 2020, in particular
those focused on efficiency enhancement and robustness of statistical production, the use of new data sources and increasing the level of quality management.
The level of quality management system was examined by internal audits.
The conformity of the system with the requirements of the ISO 9001:2008 standard and with the requirements of the SO SR was tested by system audits.
Furthermore, audits examined also the conformity of the system with part of the requirements of the new standard ISO 9001:2015, related to the organisation´s context, as well as its expertise and the employee competency.
The methodological audit was mostly focused on verification of conformity of implementing specific statistics with the requirements of the respective regulations.
The overall QMS of the SO SR has been evaluated in the annual Report
of the evaluation of the quality management system of the SO SR.
This confirms the fulfilment of one of the primary precondition for the per
ception of the Office as a reliable institution and its products and services as its credible outputs.
For managerial purposes, the Information
System for Monitoring Working Time was
used and its outputs combined with the wage and accounting system enabled monitoring and a subsequent more efficient allocation of the costs incurred for statistical projects.
The SO SR participated in quality management-related activities, as well as resources at
the level of the European Statistical System
Last year, the Office became involved in Eurostat´s initiative to monitor and manage the European statistical programme (ESP) costs where it participated in the production of unified methodology for determination of the costs and benefits of ESP projects, deciding on its prioritisation and further development.
contain information on prices, the quantity of goods sold and turnovers of individual products.
These data can complement or completely replace the traditional data collection for prices and serve as a basis for the calculation of price indices.
Working with these data represents a new and uncharted field of activity for the SO SR and their use brings many new challenges and will require a significant change of production processes.
Following the processing of data from supermarket chains, an international seminar was organized by the SO SR, in October 2016, with representatives from Austria, Slovenia and the Czech Republic, where national experts exchanged their experiences in data collection and processing.
In 2016, the SO SR was also dealing with the
calculation methodology of the increasingly requested monthly estimates of unemploy
ment rates.
In resolving this task an optimal estimation method has been proposed to meet accuracy and timeliness requirements.
Another project related to the protection of
confidential statistical data was aimed at
increasing the number of published values in industrial products statistics.
The output is an automated solution through a programme enabling fast and simple generation of the protected outputs, while respecting the data publication of reporting units with their consent.
In the field of methodology, the SO SR actively participated in several important innovative projects.
In 2016, it established cooperation with the most important supermarket chains on the market in order to test the possibilities of using their data on prices of the goods sold for the price statistics and calculation of the harmonised index of consumer prices.
In this field, it was also involved in the European
project Modernisation of price statisticsthe use of scanner data.
Transaction data
(the so-called scanner data) has been currently used in various European countries in the context of modernisation.
Scanner data obtained directly from supermarket chains
Within the project concerning modernisa
tion of EU SILC surveys, a new calculation
method for sampling weights has been introduced into practice as well as a new technique for imputing the missing data of key variables which will significantly contribute to the enhancement of the requested statistical outputs.
An important activity in the field of methodology and registers was the realisation of
various learning activities for the staff of
the SO SR.
Another series of internal staff trainings were conducted on the theory and practice of sample surveys production.
The training will be constantly continuing in order to ensure the continuous increase of the SO SR´s staffexpertise.
In the field of seasonal analysis of time
series, the SO SR renewed membership in Seasonal Adjustment User Group.
It consists of 8 members, representatives of national statistical offices (NSOs) in order to support the work of the Seasonal Adjustment Centre of Excellence as well as the developers of JDemetra+ programme which is recommended for this field by Eurostat as a standard software tool.
The members of the working group, as skilled users are testing the software, plug-ins and the new programme functionalities and are exchanging experiences in this area.
The benefits of mandatory electronic data
tronically available history of submitted returns, ready availability of electronic statistical forms which upon their publishing enable the reporting units extended time for their completion, embedded automated controls when completing the electronic form enhancing the quality of data obtained and, not least, the possibility of access from computer, anywhere in the world.
In order to facilitate the completion of electronic forms, a new module has been added to individual forms by the SO SR, in which a contact of the Office´s assistance provider (if necessary) will directly be displayed to a reporting unit.
sentatives of statistical offices, science and research institutes and universities from four continents.
In the field of statistical classifications and
Given the significant impact of changes in this classification, particularly as regards the section F - Construction, special methodological assistance was provided to the Financial Directorate of the SR and the Chamber of Tax Advisors.
Preparation for the delineation of different statistical units - global enterprises and kind-of-activity units pursuant to the upcoming new regulation of the European Parliament and the Council of Business Statistics, was a key factor in the development of registers.
Organisational and factual aspects relating to the application of European methodology to enterprise profiling at national level were stabilized within the preparation.
In relation to quality of registers, emphasis was placed on the previous quality analysis and the completeness of administrative sources ap
In 2016, 56 surveys were available online, which represented 107 statistical forms.
By introducing an electronic data capture the response rate of electronically submitted forms increased from 154 585 in 2015 (representing 36,98% of the total number of submitted forms) to 346 208 in 2016, representing 86,06% of the total number of form submissions.
If we take into account the reporting units which were granted exemptions from law, the share of forms submitted electronically would increase to 90,55%.
In 2016, the SO SR extended cooperation with ministries and state organizations pro
ducing administrative data sources (ADS)
and thus continuing in the implementation of the Concept of using ADS.
It aimed to enhance the use of the existing data sources and information in order to reduce respondent burden of statistical surveys, increase the quality of state statistics and reduce its costeffectiveness.
The obtained ADS enabled in 2016, the output improvement of state statistics and facilitating the upgrade of the statistical organizations register.
It also included the questionnaire data and the assessment of their quality.
plied in identifying activities of units registered in the statistical organizations register.
Fine-tuning and the subsequent full operation of functions for the collective upgrade of statistical registers, which were developed within the integrated statistical information system REGIS had significant impact on the quality of registers.
In cooperation with Eurostat, work continued on the development of the register of multinational enterprise groups, managed by Eurostat in EuroGroups Register (EGR).
The outcome of this cooperation is the final EGR 2014 population which was completed and made accessible by Eurostat for statistical purposes, at the beginning of 2016.
In order to map the relationships between enterprises, a new external data source has been processed and used for the first time which raised the coverage of the Slovak enterprise groups in the EGR almost by 453% compared with the previous year.
As a result of participating in the project Implementation of interoperable business registers are another profiles of 5 multinational enterprise groups with a decision-making centre in the Slovak Republic and 27 profiles of groups represented by Slovak units though with a decision-making centre outside the Slovak Republic.
By realisation of the project works, not only the professional training of the responsible employees had been completed but also the standardisation of activities relating to the specification of the statistical unit of global enterprise type.
As part of monitoring the activities of the Europe 2020 strategy, the indicators on fastgrowing innovative enterprises in the SR for the year 2015 have been processed and submitted to the European Commission, as well as quarterly indicators on bankruptcy and restructuring of enterprises whose main user is the European Central Bank.
In 2016, in the field of the Register of Legal Entities and Entrepreneurs (RLE) an intense debate with the administrators of those core registers whose data were provided already in 2015 to meet the demands of RLE, as well as with administrators of other core registers that will be compulsorily included in the RLE by the end of October 2017.
First of all, it was a correction of essential or non-essential shortcomings identified by the statistical office and were eliminated by the administrators of core registers primarily in their own core databases and subsequently also in the RLE.
For the second, it was the cooperation in identification of subjects and the quality control of the data registered in other core registers before their migration to the RLE via the generic register.
In the transition period, during which the administrators of other core registers focused on a technical and substantive preparation regarding mandatory data provision to the RLE, the generation of the company identification number was fully ensured through the IS of the RLE and the generic register functions.
In order to fully cover the data on subjects registered in the RLE, codes of the main economic activity and codes of sectoral classification of different subjects registered were sent on a daily basis.
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
Regulatory Authority for Electronic
Communications and Postal Services, Institute of Informatics and Statistics.
The list of institutions is managed and published by Eurostat included besides the
SO SR other national authorities responsible for the development, production and dissemination of European statistics for the SR:
Institute of Informatics and Statistics.
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
The fundamental legislative document for the production of the cost-optimal database
is the Programme of state statistical sur
veys for 2015-2017 (hereinafter referred to as “PSSS”) which is aligned with the European
tional Statistical System (NSS).
In 2016,
Ministry of Transport, Construction and Regional Development of the SR, Ministry of Culture of the SR,
Ministry of Interior of the SR,
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
As of 1 January 2016, two surveys have been dropped.
Compared with 2015, their number increased by 1 multiannual survey.
The SO SR included in the Programme a new statistical household survey entitled ŽP 14-01 Household Energy Consumption Survey and it will be aimed at the finding of data necessary for the estimation of household emissions.
Further proposed modifications covered, inter alia, the modification of time limits for the submission of statistical data by a reporting unit in 11 statistical surveys in their own favour.
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
Number of items
Currently, the ministry has a data from primary producers and processors and it lacks data on trade.
mal database is the respecting of the criterion
should adequately meet the users´ needs and should not be excessive for respondents.
Bur
Production of cost-optimal database in NSS and ESS
den measurement is carried out since 2008 and it is based on obtaining data on the time required for the completion of a statistical form and on evaluation of item burden (hereinafter referred to as “IB”; IB is calculated by multiplying the number of individual items in forms by the survey periodicity and by the number of reporting units).
The SO SR´s objective of reducing the response burden until 2012 by 25% was fulfilled, compared with the situation in 2008.
In 2012 compared with 2008, a decrease by 35,17% was recorded and the decrease in the number of items in forms by more than 25,67%.
In line with the SO SR´s new strategy until 2017 the burden is continuously monitored and evaluated.
It aims to examine whether the principle of conducting a survey in the context of importance, necessity and economic efficiency is fulfilled.
At the end of the year, comparisons between the years 2012 - 2015 were available.
Between 2015-2014, the total response burden, decreased by 8,6% and the number of items in forms decreased by 2,6%, year-on-year.
In 2015 compared with 2014, the NI of enterprises and entrepreneurs of all surveys conducted decreased by 5,7%.
In the group of reporting/household units a year-on-year (2015 compared to 2014) decrease of NI by 15,4% was recorded, in the public administration sector it decreased by 6,5%, year-on-year.
In 2015 compared with 2014, the total response burden measured by the total survey completion time decreased by 3,0%.
Overall labour costs of enterprises, entrepreneurs and public administration decreased by 1,0%, while in 2015, an estimation of hourly costs that enters into calculation, was EUR 9,46 and compared with 2014, it increased by EUR 0,26.
However, it should also take into account that the burden can be reduced only to the extent that the desired quality of statistical outputs will be reached.
In 2016, the SO SR continued in modernisation of statistical production which is associated with the standardisation of statistical operating procedures and the selection of appropriate methods and forms of data collection.
The changes in data collection methods required certain legislative changes.
In 2015 and 2016, the SO SR issued amendments to the PSSS, in which it sets out the details for respondents regarding the mandatory statis
tical data collection in electronic form from
1 January 2016.
It will be fully implemented gradually, for the year 2016, 12 exemptions from data provision in paper form were provided.
Thanks to electronic data collection,
the data provision deadline in favour of the reporting unit may be postponed, from
Macroeconomic statistics
Macroeconomic statistics
National accounts are compiled according to the methodology of the ESA 2010 which is an established abbrevia
tion for the European System of National and Regional Accounts.
The development of the national accounts system is in compliance with the new EU regulations and directives as one of the main objectives of macroeconomic statistics.
GDP in mil.
EUR
Current actual data on GDP development in time series 1995-2015
GDP - constant prices of the previous year GDP - constant prices calculated by chaining volumes
Works in the ﬁeld of the System of national accounts
Within standard works, the annual sector accounts for 2015, regional data for 2014 and 2015, input-output tables (TDP) and symmetric input-output tables (SIOT) for 2013, in the full range of the transmission programme pursuant to the Eurostat requirements, have been compiled based on the information of statistical reporting, administrative data sources and additional information as well.
The standard autumn revision of data for the years 2014 and 2013
was conducted and released in compliance with the revision policy available at the website of the SO SR.
Besides the standard revision, a data revision was realized in the annual national accounts due to sectoral reclassification of units based on ESA 2010 methodology in the whole time series, starting from 2005.
Note: - Methodology of ESA 2010 - CPLY - corresponding period last year - constant prices calculated by chaining volumes with the use of the reference year 2010 - years 2013 and 2014 - semi-definite data - year 2015 - preliminary data
GDP - current prices
GDP - constant prices calculated by chaining volumes
on macroeconomic development and the subsequent debate within 65 days once the reference quarter ended.
EU Member States are required to provide data on gross national income and data on VAT for the preparation of the EU budget.
In this context, a standard draft of gross national income as well as data on compensation for small companies exempted from VAT and data on weighted average VAT duty rate (WAR) were prepared for the MF SR.
In September 2016, a questionnaire on transition from GDP to a gross national income (GNI) was sent to Eurostat.
An obligatory part of the GNI questionnaire is the quality report which summarised all the changes and amendments of methodological approaches for GDP/GNI compilation.
Based on GNI data and the key established in accordance with the European regulation, each member state´s contribution to the EU budget is calculated.
In 2016, several working meetings were organized with colleagues from the Czech Statistical Office.
The focus of the meetings was on the exchange of experience concerning ESA 2010 implementation.
Besides the scheduled tasks, employees were dealing with current issues within interministry working groups.
Much of the work concerned the completion of questionnaires for international organizations (CMFB, Eurostat, ILO, OECD, UNECE etc.) as well as the preparation of materials for economic analyses of ministries and state institutions (IFP, MFSR, NBS, MHSR etc).
Works in the ﬁeld of External Trade Statistics
In 2016, there was a monthly provision of data on external trade statistics and its updates, as well as import and export price indices according to fixed deadlines.
The requested data on goods by business characteristics were sent to Eurostat.
Cost analyses of the current Intrastat were developed and by comparison with that, the qualitative and quantitative analyses of the future impacts of each alternative.
There was continued cooperation to prepare the proposal for a regulation on business statistics (FRIBS) encompassing the External Trade Statistics as well.
On the legislative side, the regulation implements the planned modernising of the Intrastat system, analysed within the VIP projects Redesign of Intrastat and SIMSTAT.
This Regulation introduces the
In respect of microdata exchange a greater freedom is assumed in using various data sources, especially in compiling intra-EU imports.
The proposed actions should result in the overall reduction of response burden of reporting units while maintaining data quality.
Domestically, we analysed mainly the possible impact on the use of intra-EU imports data for the departments in different publishing by the country of origin of goods to publishing by the country of dispatch of goods.
Changes in Extrastat were analysed, arising from the EU´s Custom Code, resulting in adjustment of input data for Extrastat and subsequent preparation of publication changes from 2017.
The Guide for the Intrastat reporting units, was also updated.
During the year, reporting units were given 3 seminars in various towns, attended by 45 persons.
Besides the basic information on Intrastat, the seminars provided an overview of the latest legislative changes and answers to specific questions concerning data reporting.
Meetings with the reporting units having difficulties with the quality and timeliness of data transmission were also organized.
A Consulting Unit provided individual consultations by means of e-mails and telephone calls.
The collected data was intensively verified in the same way, by the staff of the Regional Office in Trnava.
In business short-term statistics, the priority was the ensuring of Eurostat data transmission by means of the eDAMIS web portal, as well as data release of national users based on the SO SR´s publication system.
A regular updating of Eurostat metadata files was assured through the ESS Metadata Handler.
Eurostat requirements regarding a more detailed description of certain parts of metadata quality reports were fulfilled at the same time, where the SO SR was positively assessed.
In the overall compatibility evaluation concerning the regulation on short-term statistics, the SO SR was still ranked among the first category of member states with the best level of compatibility.
In 2016, the works regarding the calcula
tion of index of services production contin
ued, concerning tasks resulting from further changes to the FRIBS regulation (Framework
Regulation Integrating Business Statistics).
Works were focused mainly on the refinement of the ISP calculations by input data acquisition (turnover and price deflators) at a more detailed level -SK NACE Revision 2 - for the selected sectors.
The aim is to set up a methodological framework and conditions for the security of compiling the index of services production in accordance with the regulation requirements.
The outputs resulting from annual structural statistics, were transmitted within the required time and extent, in the form of sets of final indicators for 2014 and preliminary data for 2015 for the financial and non-financial sector.
The objective and time-consuming validation process of output files has been handled in line with the requirements on the structure of defined outputs and respecting the appropriate technical format for the transmission of data.
Thanks to the highquality file validation, Eurostat expressed satisfaction with the provided data as a result of which the SO SR was included in the first category of member states with the best level of compatibility with the regulation on structural statistics.
Statistical outputs for domestic and non-domestic foreign affiliates for the year 2014 were transmitted to Eurostat in the time and quality required.
Quality reports were elaborated and submitted to Eurostat through the ESS Metadata Handler also in this statistical field.
In statistics of industry, works were focused on fulfilling the requirements of national and international organizations and upgrading the PRODSLOV list of industrial goods valid for 2017.
Analytical works regarding the development assessment of priority indicators for industry have been continuing due to the fact that the major constituent part of gross domestic products is produced in individual industry´s activities.
In 2016, there were also some activities aimed at increasing the scope of data provided for the field of statistics of products.
Within the successful Eurostat project, analytical works were realized, focused on identification of the population of subjects, which would allow publication of confidential data on production and sale of products in natural terms, provided they give consent to do so.
It was followed by the communication with the management of industrial enterprises in order to explain the benefit of this activity consisting mainly of the dissemination of publication outputs used in the management process and evaluation of economic activity of the respective industrial activities.
In the field of agricultural statistics the
project Farm Structure Survey 2016 was launched.
logical basis for all EU Member States.
The survey has been carried out among both legal and natural persons as well as non-registered natural persons-in households fulfilling the threshold values stipulated in the definition of a farm.
The statistical outputs on vineyards, based on the Vineyards Register kept by the Central Controlling and Testing Institute in Agriculture were ensured in line with the require
ments of the Regulation (EU) No 1337/2011 concerning European statistics of permanent crops.
Data on vineyard acreage, cultivated vineyard species and also on the structure of winegrowing enterprises were transmitted to Eurostat.
Active cooperation with the National Agricultural and Food Centre- the Research Institute of Agricultural and Food Economics regarding the data provision and processing necessary for its compilation.
In September 2016, definitive results of the Economic Account for Agriculture of the SR for 2015 were published.
The business statistics of construction, hous
ing, trade and services, focused mainly on
ensuring statistical outputs in a prescribed structure and on the scrupulous respect of data submission deadlines to Eurostat.
Increased attention was paid also to the metadata update of the published indicators.
CPLY index (s.c 2010)
Construction production in total
Buildings
Business statistics
dwelling units started, under construction and completed.
The publication Construction of Dwellings over the years 2005 to 2015 was issued, providing a comprehensive view on a long-term development of the basic quantitative and qualitative indicators describing three stages of the construction process in the regional breakdown.
tistics, work has been progressing on output processing pursuant to the requirements prescribed by Eurostat, UNECE, International Transport Forum, the Danube Commission,
The SO SR participated again in the joint survey programme of the EU countries on the usage of information and communication technologies in enterprises, organized by Eurostat.
Started
Under construction Completed
Number of apartments
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
included new indicators and validation elements have been incorporated into the processing.
The SO SR participated in the preparation of the model form of Eurostat and the EU Member States on innovations for the next decade and implemented relevant modules into its survey including the innovative-based pilot module in logistics, developed for DG MOVE, European Commission.
In energy statistics, the focus was on completion of the project Experimental Compilation of Physical Energy Flow Accounts (PEFA).
The SO SR prepared the implementation of the Regulation No 2016/1952 of the EP and of the Council on European statistics on natural gas and electricity prices and repealing Directive 2008/92/EC.
The Office actively participated in individual commenting phases of the amend
ment of the Regulation (EC) No 1099/2008 of the EP and of the Council on energy statistics and it implemented new requirements into the monthly statistical surveys.
the Office has commenced the CNG consumer price survey and since then, there was a dissemination of fuel prices by CNG prices.
In real estate statistics, the main focus was on developing methodology for the calculation of housing market development indicators.
This concerned in particular the indicators on the number of property sold and the development of housing expenditure in property purchase.
In the field of production statistics, the focus was on the revision of weighting schemes for industrial producer prices while the transition to a new base year was carried out from January 2017.
At the same time, inputs were provided for the revision of weighting schemes in other surveys, to be revised in 2017.
Regarding the survey on prices in selected market services, certain modules were updated, based on consultations with trade union representatives.
In the field of tourism statistics, the Office continued the process of ensuring standard statistical outputs through its publication system, as well as high volume of non-standard outputs for the external users at national level.
There was an undergoing compilation of tourism satellite accounts tables, supplemented by the year 2014.
In price statistics, a transition of the Survey of Harmonised Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) to a new base period (based on average of 2015=100), was carried out, while indices to a new base were published beginning with January.
Metadata describing the HICP methodology in the ESMS structure were also updated.
Work continued on developing methodology for the usage of supermarket chains data in consumer price statistics.
from the 1st to the 4th quarter of 2016
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Last year, within the project of Business and Consumer Surveys, the main focus was on quality enhancement of the processed and published data.
Increased attention was paid to the methodological definition of input indicators and the correct output interpretation in the analytical activities and data publishing.
In Business Surveys, during the communication with the reporting units, the Office continued in the improvement of response rate and optimisation of data collection.
In Consumer Surveys, in 2016, the project team of the European Commission focused attention on further harmonisation of questions in a unified questionnaire.
In data collection and processing of socio-occupational status, an International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-08) was introduced in order to ensure greater comparability of the data covered.
The result of processing of Business Consumer Surveys for the sectors of industry, construction, retail trade, services, industrial investments and the consumer barometer were submitted to the EC in monthly periodicity and in a prescribed structure, to the agreed schedule.
At national and international level, data are used for calculation of business composite indicators (confidence indicator in industry, construction, retail trade, services, consumer confidence index and the subsequently calculated economic sentiment indicator) which characterize the current and expected short-term development of business environment in a particular field.
To both international and national organizations and financial institutions (EC, OECD, ECB, NBS, INFOSTAT) they serve as basis for the realisation of short-term predictions of future develop
ment of basic macroeconomic indicators including realisation of quarterly flash GDP estimates.
Within the cooperation with the interna
framework regulation integrating business
statistics (FRIBS).
The negotiations on the basic legal act of FRIBS were concluded during the extraordinary meeting of Business Statistics Directors´ Group in October and the final version of the proposal was submitted to Eurostat for consultation between the European Commission units.
During the Presidency of the Council of the EU, the Office participated in negotiations of proposals for regulations in the field of inland waterways freight transport statistics, railway freight transport statistics and the regulation on European statistics of natural gas and electricity prices.
Within bilateral communication with the
Czech Statistical Office, the business statistics attended various consulting meetings aimed at methodological resolutions of current tasks.
The cooperation continued with meetings and working visits in order to exchange experiences in the field of statistics on science, technology and innovations and energy statistics.
The meetings were focused on implementation of the updated international methodology of the 2015 Frascati manual into the research and development statistics, new innovation survey indicators, fulfilment of international requirements pursuant to the regulation on energy statistics according to the directive on energetic efficiency and compilation of energy balances.
In the field of population statistics, data processing and dissemination were further developed, in 2016.
Data on population movement were completely processed in a new framework of the Integrated Statistical Information System (ISIS) and, at the same time, there was a detailed testing of the selected ad
ministrative data sources and registers containing demographic data, where a potential for population statistics has been identified.
Demographic population development in 2015 was the main topic of the press conference of the SO SR, in June 2016.
Migration development in the SR, 2006-2015
Demography and social statistics
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Population development was documented also by publishing of books issued as part of the series We in Numbers: Population Change 2015, International Migration 2015 and a new title Young Population in the SR 2015 presenting statistical information on the youth population of the Slovak Republic, composed of demographic data and selected data on social statistics as well.
In the edition of analytical series such as the Statistics in Contexts Main Trends of Population Development in the SR in 2015 and Social Protection in the SR, were published as the standard analytical publishing outputs.
For the first time, the publication Main Trends of Population Development in Bratislava the Capital of the SR 2015 was published.
For the second year in a row, the Working Group of the President of the SO SR for the preparation of 2021 Population and Housing Census continued its activities.
In 2016, it fulfilled its first main objective - to propose an optimal method of census taking in the SR.
It combines the advantages of the traditional census and the census using data from registers and administrative sources.
The main advantages of the integrated census are the reduction of the response burden, quality preservation of the obtained data and information, and efficiency.
In August 2016, the SO SR submitted to the Government of the SR the conceptual design of the 2021 Census, within the section of Information on the 2021 Population and Housing Census in the Slovak Republic.
In this context, we appreciated that the Government of the SR considers the Census as one of its priority, what was also confirmed in the Manifesto of the Government: “The Government will support the Population and Housing Census 2021 as the unique opportunity to acquire reliable, comparable and interconnected data on the state of society, its structures and housing.
In doing so, the Government will take into account the administrative burden reduction of the population.”
The SO SR is considered by the National Action Plan as the partnership instrument for cooperation with selected ministries, other central government authorities, organisations under their jurisdiction and municipal authorities.
The expert team defined the strategic goals, activities and measures, pursuing the conceptual design of the 2021 Population and Housing Census preparation.
Statistics on wages and labour cost continued
The overall picture about the remuneration expenditures was completed by calculated data on the total labour cost incurred by the employers.
Labour statistics acquired, processed and provided quarterly and annual information on the employment development in terms of enterprises and households, short-term labour migration, vacancies, unemployment and economic inactivity.
In the 2nd quarter, the Labour Force Survey (LFS) was expanded by additional module focused on the young people in the labour market.
The research work for the needs of the EU was devoted to the development and testing of methodology for estimating the monthly unemployment rate and testing of the forthcoming ad hoc survey of the LFS in 2018 on reconciliation of family and professional
Average wage growth dynamics in the SR over the years 1996-2016
previous year = 100
Nominal wage
Real wage
In the 2nd half of the year, data collection was carried out in households (AES) and in organizations (CVTS).
Activities were carried out in terms of the existing EU legislation and according to the instructions and recommendations from Eurostat.
Households account statistics provides data
on income, expenditure, consumption and the composition of private households in the SR.
Data were processed from the survey carried out completely in 2015.
The results were published at the SO SR`s website in the online publication Incomes, Expenditures and Consumption of Private Households in the SR in 2015.
tions of Households, which is the main data source providing an overall picture on poverty, social exclusion and living conditions.
In 2016, microdata and indicators from the EU SILC 2015 survey were processed and sent to the Eurostat and the anonymised microdata, were provided to external users for scientific and
18,4 % - Indicator of poverty and social exclusion
At-risk-of-poverty rate
9,0 % Severe material deprivation
5,6 % Low labour intensity
research purposes, based on standard and ad hoc requirements.
Data were presented in two publications, the EU SILC 2015 - Survey on Income and Living Conditions of Households in the SR and the EU SILC 2015 - Indicators of Poverty and Social Exclusion.
Recently, there is a strong emphasis on the production and analyses of the main poverty indicator and social exclusion e.g. on the strategy EU 2020 or on the 2030 Agenda 2030 for the SR.
Indicator is formed by combining the three partial indicators, the at-risk-ofpoverty rate, severe material deprivation rate and low work intensity rate.
According to the EU SILC 2015 results, 18,4 % of the Slovak population were at risk of the poverty or social exclusion.
Survey on Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Usage in households
The survey was conducted in April - May 2015, in 4 690 random households in the territory of the Slovak Republic.
In the households of selected individuals, interviewers surveyed the internet access (internet use) and the internet activities performed by individuals: e.g. contact with public authorities through the webpages (public administration online use), purchase of goods or services through the internet for private purposes (electronic commerce use).
Respondents were also surveyed in terms of knowledge and skills, as computer activities related to mobile devices or software-related activities (Knowledge and skills in the field of ICT).
In 2016, a particular attention was paid
to the protection of personal and confidential data during private internet use.
The ICT survey results were published by the SO SR at its website, as an online publication Survey on Information and Communication Technology Usage in Households 2016.
In the field of food consumption statistics
data on consumption of certain types of food for the year 2014 were derived according to the balance sheet method.
These data are freely available for users in the database of the SO SR in a comparable time series since 1990.
Data on food consumption are regular part of the situation and outlook reports of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of the SR, evaluating the market development in the SR for individual food commodities.
The SO SR collects processes and provides
data in terms of expenditure on health for
The SO SR has been preparing the processing of election results since October 2015.
The Office established specialised summary
From the recorded minutes of the local election commissions district election commissions were established by summarization and approved by commissions.
Based on the minutes of local election commissions, the minutes of the State Commission for Elections and Control of Financing of Political Parties was
created and subsequently approved.
In the both dates, new elections were held in 63 municipalities.
Together, 28 new mayors and 35 new MPs were elected.
It was used not only by the members of specialised summary units, but also by the municipalities, which were interested in the electronic election results processing.
Employees of the Regional Offices of the SO SR, as the members of specialised summary units of the district election commissions, significantly participated in all tasks in the field of election statistics.
The Institute of Informatics and Statistics (INFOSTAT), as a research and development centre in the field of official statistics, annually cooperates with the Statistical Office of the SR in resolving the research and development tasks in the sphere of official statistics.
The cooperation is conducted on the basis of contract concluded between the two institutions, for the year in question, in accordance with the Government Decree of the SR.
The content of the contract is taking into account the priority statistical activities of the Office and the actual needs, resulting from the customer requirements.
In 2016, the INFOSTAT met 29 research and development tasks consisting of 91 partial outputs mainly focused on:
methodological solutions - of the tech
nological process for the compilation of agricultural account and the Tourism Satellite Account (TSA) for the year 2014; programming solutions for energy statistics;
updating and development - of the soft
ware for processing of the business consumer surveys in the field of energy and
implementation of changes into processing of price statistics with monthly and quarterly periodicity;
calculations and constructions - pro
cessing of monthly, quarterly, semi-annually and annually population movement and population balance at the end of the reference period from data of the Source Database of the Integrated Statistical Information System (SD ISIS);
analyses, studies, prognosis and surveys
The studies were as follows::
Methodological evaluation of the indicators analysing public health conditions - EU SILC and EHIS
Design of expenditures evaluating public health conditions in Slovakia
International decomposition of the indicator results and their impact on the quality of health conditions
Multidimensional analysis of respondents in respect of the differences in health assessment
Interpretation of data obtained and analytical evaluation of the possible differences of public health indicators in Slovakia - EU SILC and EHIS
Analysis of the possible uses of other health indicators
The cooperation with the SO SR, operation of the INFOSTAT and the DRC in 2016 is documented in detail in the annual report of the Institute for the year 2016 at the websites www.infostat.sk and www.infostat.sk/vdc.
In terms of customer service provision, the SO SR continued to meet the action programmes set out in the strategic objectives of the Office.
Activities carried out in accordance with the approved Marketing Plan of the SO SR for the year 2016 were aimed at ensuring of the product portfolio for national and international organizations, satisfying the needs and expectations of the users of statistical information as well as enhancing their knowledge level.
The SO SR ensured the provision of data sets for domestic and foreign customers, on the basis of requirements, which have been included in the products portfolio for the year 2016.
During the year, in total, 534 products were
Among the domestic customers, it concerns, above all, legislative and executive authorities of the state administration, mainly the National Bank of Slovakia (41 % of the products), the Ministry of Finance of the SR, the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of the SR, the Ministry of Economy of the SR and the Ministry of Transport, Construction and Regional Development of the SR.
for management, decision-making processes and for social-economic development analyses of the society.
Ensuring products portfolio for international and intergovernmental organization concerned particular processing of data for the Eurostat (81 %).
Other data consumers were the United Nations, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, the International Energy Agency, the International Transport Forum and the Food and Agriculture Organization.
In total, 295 products were
provided to the international organizations,
during the year 2016.
The Statistical Office of the SR also realized marketing activities, aimed at information provision to the users about the possibilities of obtaining and using of statistical products, improving knowledge in the sphere of statistics, and detecting their expectations.
The competent departments at the Central Office as well as at the Regional Offices of the SO SR organized workshops, presentations, discussions and lectures with debates.
Those events were attended particularly by secondary schools and university students; representatives of the central bodies of state administration, local self-governments and financial institutions.
During the year, in total, 36 events were held
restrictions of the use of statistical information.
Customers also obtained information about the methodological processes, organisation of statistical surveys and the electronic data collection.
On the occasion of the Slovak Presidency of the Council of the EU and the European Statistics Day which the Eurostat has designated at October 20th, the Statistical Office of the SR
organized the specialized conference: Statistics - a Mirror of Society.
The event was held
The conference was attended by several representatives of the Eurostat led by Mrs. Mariana Kotzeva, the Deputy Director General.
satisfied 2 935 requests, in total, of which 86 % were from domestic and 14 % from foreign customers.
The most requests were from enterprises, syndicates, associations and trade unions (22 %).
A high interest about the statistical information was registered among students (21 %), but also among the general public (19 %).
A lower interest about the statistical information was shown by financial institutions, science and research representatives.
According to thematic areas, similarly as in previous years, the highest interest was recorded for the information in the sphere of demography and social statistics (37 % of the requests).
A considerable interest was also shown for organizational statistics and sector statistics.
Almost one quarter of all demands was constituted by non-standard requests, which required processing by the competent departments of the Office.
In 2016, there were 22 contracts concluded
with the institutions from scientific and aca
demic community.
During the year, a seasonal character was demonstrated in the field of statistical information; the greatest interest for information was shown in March and the lowest in September and December.
In total, 1 477 requests were met by the Re
The requesters were predominantly interested in demography and social statistics data.
Within the international network of the Eu
ropean Statistical Data Support (ESDS), the
Office ensured the information provision to
Enterprises, syndicates, associations, trade unions
Students, teachers
We serve customers
Demography and social statistics
Multi-domain statistics
Activities in this field were realised on the basis of gentlemen's agreement with Eurostat.
The Library of the SO SR was available for cus
tomers and its services were used by 458 rea
ders (Office's employees and external visitors), during 2016.
758 borrowings were registered.
The Library stocks were increased by 645 new volumes, of which 454 were new publications of the Office.
The Library ordered and registered 5 titles of newspapers and 28 journals, which were assigned to the Office`s divisions.
In 2016, the website was visited by
1 359 559 users of statistics in total, what represents a year-on-year increase by 35 %.
The
total number of website`s displays reached almost 7,5 million (by 34 % more than in 2015).
Number of satisfied requests by the thematic fields at the Central Office and Regional Offices of the SO SR
During the year, on the basis of the action plan of the Open Government Action Plan, the SO SR added 20 new datasets in the field of the Elections to the National Council of the SR in 2016 to the open data portal (http://data.gov.sk/).
In selecting the datasets, the Office considered the importance and public demands for the most requested data.
The SO SR released 606 datasets, therefore it
remains the notable leader in the field of the open statistical data and metadata approach.
In accordance with the Catalogue of Publicati
on 2016, the Office published 75 publications
in total, during the year.
6 titles were published beyond the Catalogue.
Among the crucial publications belonged: Statistical Yearbook of the SR 2016, Regional Statistical Yearbook of Slovakia 2016 and sectorial yearbooks.
In terms of publication activity, the Office paid a significant attention to the creation of value-added products, with analytical texts and visualisation tools.
Furthermore, in
total, 19 types of information and promotional
newsletters from different statistical fields were published.
All publications were available on the Office`s website.
We publish the Journal Slovak Statistics and Demography
We publish the Journal Slovak Statistics and Demography
Even in 2016, the Slovak Statistics and De
Four numbers of the journal were published in 2016.
They were fully released at the Office`s website www.statistics.sk following a three months after the issuing of the print version, and it was welcomed positively by the readers.
Despite the electronic version of the Journal, the number of subscribers of the Slovak Statistics and Demography started to increase slightly.
Every year, readers can look forward to one monothematic issue, focused on the specific fields of Slovak Statistics and Demography.
In 2016, the scientific, peer-reviewed Journal´s focus of attention was primarily on children and youth.
There were several reasons why the Editorial Board decided to elaborate this topic.
It was primarily relying on the Strategy of the Slovak Republic for youth for the years 2014 - 2020.
Thus, the topic of number 3/2016 has a cross-cutting nature.
The updated Report 2016 on task performance resulting from the National Action Plan for Children 2013-2017 also referred to the content of monothematic issue of the scientific peer-reviewed Journal Slovak Statistics and Demography as a potential data source.
To promote the Journal, the editors present the content of all issues to the ever-increasing number of the potential readers.
Despite being aware that the impact of these activities will only become apparent in the long term, the responses are encouraging.
All recent activities aim at strengthening the status of Slovak Statistics and Demography on the market and at its positive perception by the readers as the modern journal, which decisively work towards the objective of prospective incorporation into the international citation databases.
In 2016, the priority in the sphere of statistical legislation was the performance of the Presidency of the Slovak Republic in the
Council of the EU.
During the first half of the year, the Office was focused mainly on the intensive preparation of the Presidency - by setting the cooperation mechanisms with the General Secretariat of the Council and with the Permanent Representation of the SR to the EU, cooperation was intensified with the Dutch colleagues and with the Commission.
A greater attention was paid to the detailed elaboration of legislative acts which were in the ratification process at the beginning of the year.
Following the beginning of the Presidency, the Presidency Team of the SO SR was building on the efficient work of the Dutch colleagues and formally completed the adoption of four statistical legislative acts: the regulation on statistics on natural gas and electricity prices, and the amendments of the regulations on statistics relating to external trade with nonmember countries, on rail transport statistics, and on statistics of goods transport by inland waterways.
Within the Council Working Party on Statistics, the Presidency Team of the SO SR focused on two particularly significant legislative proposals, which were adopted by Commission at the end of August and at the beginning of September.
The Presidency Team of the SO SR contributed to the significant advance in the proposal negotiations by the written comment process as well as by direct negotiation on the working group meeting.
Considering the scope, complexity and diversity of approaches on the part of the Member States, the Maltese Presidency will continue in the adoption process and will build on the approach and the results achieved by the SK PRES.
Eurostat (workshops)
In 2016, six legislative acts were adopted in the field of statistics - besides four regulations
adopted during the Slovak Presidency there
were the regulation on harmonised indices of consumer prices and the amendment of the regulation regarding the balance of payments statistics which were adopted in the first half of the year.
The field of implementing regulations was much wider for statistics.
In 2016, 57 nonlegislative acts were adopted for statistics.
In September, a memorandum of understan
Several international events in Slovakia were organized by the Office.
The most remarkable event
was the conference: Statistics - a Mirror of
The Office`s managers attended the meetings of director groups and management committees.
The heads of the EU Statistical Offices met on an annual basis in four meetings of the European Statistical System Committee (ESSC), four meetings of the Partnership Group and in the DGINS Conference.
As for knowledge and competence acquisition the Office`s representatives participated in 26 workshops and five representatives of the Office were sent to attend the meetings realised within the projects co-financed with EU funds.
During the Presidency, the Office`s representatives participated more intensively in the events organized by the Council of the EU.
60 individual travels were realized in respect of these activities.
The expert groups meetings of the international organizations such as the OECD and the UNECE were attended by the Office`s representatives, and they also actively participated in 12 international conferences abroad.
In terms of bilateral and regional cooperation, 27 representatives travelled to the neighbouring countries.
In total, 209 foreign trips were organized by the Office, which represented 280 individual travels.
The travels were realized mainly to the seat of the Eurostat in Luxembourg and to the seat of the Council of the EU in Brussels.
During the last year of the project realization
aiming at the Kazakhstan`s statistical system
development, in which the Office participated as the member of the international consortium, the study visit of representatives of the Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Statistics took place in the Office focusing the quality management.
In August, the President of the Czech Sta
The purpose of the visit was exchange of experience in the field of the ICT security during elections and the financing of the elections and the household budget survey.
at the age of 31 - 40;
at the age of 41 - 50;
at the age of 51 - 60;
over the age of 60;
78,4 % women and 21,6 % men worked at the Office.
Out of 125 managers, there were 69,6 % women and 30,4 % men.
For the period January - December 2016, the expenditure was EUR 9 395 481, hence the limit for the obligatory indicator
Educational structure
On 31 December 2016, education and age structure of the Office‘s staff was as follows:
for wages, salaries, pays, and others personal surcharge was complied, in 2016 has been respected.
In 2016, 60 foreign education activities were at
tended by the Office`s employees (international educational workshops, seminars and conferences, foreign courses and consultations regarding the Slovak Presidency of the Council of the EU).
19 professional courses within the European Statistical Training Programme were part of the total number of foreign education activities.
The Office`s two representatives participated in the ESTP courses as lecturers.
In 2016, EUR 44 360 were used by the Office for educational purposes.
Electronic collection also contains sophisticated controls, helping users while completing data or in certain cases pre-fille the data for users.
Simultaneously, more and more administrative sources are involved, which help improving the statistical output quality, as they are used as complementary sources of statistical data.
In some cases, they replace data obtained through statistical reports thus reducing the administrative burden or pre-filled data for the reporting units via sophisticated algorhitmization.
By declaring it as a reference register, the RLE became mandatory data source of legal entities for other public authorities for the
The above-mentioned transitional period was set out so that other source registers shall be able to carry out the implementation works of their systems for data provision immediately after data entry, as required by law.
At the end of 2016, the Register merged data from the 12 registers under the Ministry of Justice of the SR and under the Ministry of Interior of the SR:
1.
Business Register 2.
Information systems and information and communication technologies
4.
Register of the Interest Associations
of Legal Persons
5.
Trade Register
and Political Movements 7.
Register of Foundations 8.
Register of Non-profit Organisations
Providing Generally Beneficial Services 10.
Evidence of Civil Associations 11.
Register of Trade Union Organisations
and Employers' Associations 12.
Register of Organisations
with the International Element
Finalization of the testing phase and its subsequent putting into operation is planned for 2017.
The MIS`s objective is the possibility of monitoring projects costs, activities, cost centres and the time of employees, as well as, costs for their various combinations.
This will allow, the management to adopt measures, contributing to increasing the efficiency of the SO SR through the allocation of sources.
The SO SR as part of the European statistics, is involved in projects organized by the Eurostat also in the sphere of information technologies.
The project will be implemented over the years 2017 - 2018.
As a result, publications intended for the public could be supplemented with cartographic outputs.
Within the project of Innovation of LAN/WAN communication and security services innovation, the implementation of voice service on the basis of the VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) took place.
The added value of the VoIP implementation was the central management of network participants by the SO SR`s technical support, flexible options of the virtual unit without any further hardware investment claims.
The Office was also supplied with a new telephone apparatus with call history and employee phone directory and with minimum requirements for extending the original network infrastructure.
At the end of 2016, modernisation of the database environment began by acquiring new Oracle licences.
The database software will be deployed in new server infrastructure, located in the data centres of the SO SR.
Database modernisation will increase the availability and efficiency of the SO SR`s information systems will be acquired by database environment modernization.
The Informatics Directorate ensured operation of 23 applications, of which 5 applications are designated for internal administration, 5 for GIS- data analysis, seasonal adjustment, data analyses and protection of confidentiality of statistical data, 3 major applications for statistics, elections and the RLE, 5 applications for national and international cooperation and 5 applications for the production of specific statistics.
Approved budget
During 2016, the budget of the Office was adjusted by 17 budgetary measures of the Ministry of Finance of the SR to EUR 21 722 161,92.
(EUR 500 thous.), an increase of the limit by funds from the European Union and funds from the state budget earmarked for the cofinancing of joint programs of the SR and the EU earmarked for the refund of personal expenses for the project Register and Identifier of Legal Entities and Entrepreneurs (EUR 429 499,92).
Other adjustments were related to the commitment for the current expenditures limit in order to ensure the compensation for purchase prices of milk and wage indexation for the pedagogical and professional staff and university teachers (EUR 415 714), commitment of current expenditures (EUR 113 264,15) and capital expenditures (EUR 1 211 283,85) for the benefit of the chapter of the Ministry of Finance of the SR in terms of the Oracle License and Service Agreement and commitment for capital expenditures with respect of their possible use in the next financial year (EUR 1 142 877).
- comparison between approved and adjusted budget
For the year 2016, the indicator for a binding revenue limit -in the amount of EUR 180 000 was approved for the SO SR.
The budgetary measure of the Ministry of Finance of the SR decreased the limit of revenues to EUR 96 995.
A binding indicator - nontax revenues - was exceeded compared with the adjusted the budget by EUR 12 252.
The adjusted budget of expenditures amounted to EUR 21 722 161,92 was drawn actually in the amount of EUR 22 991 978.
Adjusted budget for salaries and wages was EUR 9 395 674 excluding funds of the European Union and funds co-financed from the state budget, in the total amount of EUR 319 014).
Budget for the insurance payments and for the insurance contribution covered by an employer was in the amount of EUR 3 945 844 (excluding funds of the European Union and funds co-financed from the state budget, in the total amount of EUR 110 486), of which EUR 228 516 from the budget for the Elections to the National Council of the SR, EUR 6 317 from the budget for the Presidency of the SR in the EU Council in the year 2016, and EUR 262 922 were used from the extra-budgetary resources.
In total, EUR 7 149 764 were used for goods and services, of which EUR 792 234 from the budget for the Elections to the National Council of the SR, EUR 2 322 948 from the funds of the financial burdens for ensuring the sustainability of the results accrued from the projects Operational Programme Information of Society, EUR 572 395 from the founds for ensuring the operation sustainability of the information systems of the SO SR, EUR 69 686 from the funds for education and operation of training centre, EUR 47 861 from the budget for the Presidency of the SR in the EU Council in the year 2016 and EUR 310 745 were used from the extra-budgetary resources.
information, contribution to the social fond, and employee catering.
A substantial share was represented by expenditures on energies and communication, object security and operation of motor vehicles.
Current transfers were drawn in the amount of EUR 1 052 355 of which EUR 963 477 were assigned to the subsidised organisation - INFOSTAT.
Other transfers were used on severance grant, severance pay and sickness benefits.
Capital expenditures were drawn in the amount of EUR 321 359.
This amount was used for the purchase of software, IT equipment, passenger cars, operational machines and equipment, reconstruction and modernisation of software.
Expenditures incurred mainly for the overtime payments, remunerations and related insurance contributions of employees involved in the processing of result of the Elections to the National Council of the SR.
Expenditures on goods and services were spent on material provision of expert summary units, telecommunication services, technical assistance services and on agreement for the performance of work.
The project was implemented within the sub-programme - the Electronization of PA and the development of Electronic Services at the central level of the Ministry of Finance of the SR - the SO SR, resolved by the Statistical Office as a participant of the interdepartmental program, the OPIS.
In 2015, the project was completed and it has been put into service operation.
In a subsequent period, development of the in
In terms of implementation the ESS Vision 2020, the important activity within the key quality area remains to be the active participation in the European Statistical System´s (ESS) structures in developing the ESS common quality framework by integrating the TQM (Total Quality Management) requirements into this framework.
The priority in relation to evaluation of the level of implementation of the Quality Management System of the SO SR will be the re-certification of the system in terms of the ISO 9001:2015 carried out by an internationally accredited certification body.
Another significant priority within system development will be the completion of the implementation of the SO SR´s Development Strategy´s action programmes until the year 2017 and the assessment of their continuation, during the next strategic period with the targets reflecting the new situation in the Office´s internal and external environment.
In the field of methodology, the activities will continue related to the implementation of transaction data, so called scanner data, into the price statistics production.
The presumed activities will predominantly concern linking of the internal classifications of supermarket chains with the statistical classifications as well as the design, preparations and testing of programme software for processing of this type of data.
The SO SR will continue to focus on the active communication with data suppliers through the electronic data collection.
Regarding communication enhancement with the reporting units, the SO SR is preparing a provision of direct feedback in selected statistical fields via the so- called visualised statistics - infographics.
Simultaneously, the Office plans to conduct on a daily basis a satisfaction survey of statistical surveys` respondents with electronic data collection and the communication with the Office`s staff.
In case of code lists created for the registration of subjects in the Register of Legal Entities and Entrepreneurs (RLE), the main aim will be their full harmonization with the applicable national legislation and standards.
In the field of statistical registers and statistical units, focus will be on the thorough preparation and ensuring of all requirements resulting from business registers according to the proposal for a new Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Business Statistics.
A special emphasis will be placed on data ensuring for the purpose of monitoring the fulfilment of the Agenda 2030 objectives.
tivities in 2017 will be focused on the task fulfilments resulting from the conclusions from the Eurostat mission in January 2017 in the
context of materials for the third own resource of the EU budget (WAR and compensations), completing the activities of the grant project GP 09 - 14 Provision of basic information on the purchasing power parities and execution the activities of the grant project GP 06 - 16 on the methodology implementation of the ESA 2010.
Attention will be paid to the preparation of materials for the first mission of the Eurostat within the new verification process during the 2nd half of 2017 and to a subsequent meeting of the action points resulting from its conclusions, as well as, to the preparation and ensuring of the tabular outputs of the TP ESA 2010 in context of the required SDMX standards of STRUVAL and CONVAL for all domains of the Transmission programme ESA 2010.
The processing and dissemination of data will be ensured with respect to changes in the Extrastat and there will be an on-going cooperation in the preparation of implemented and delegated acts of the FRIBS Regulation regarding external trade statistics.
During 2017, in the field of business statistics, activities on the preparation of the basic legal act - the FRIBS (Framework Regulation Integrating Business Statistics) will continue as well as the preparation of the new legislation in terms of the Strategy for agricultural statistics for 2020 and beyond.
In the field of agriculture statistics, one of the priorities will be the preparation of statistical outputs from the Farm Structure Survey 2016 complying with the EU regulation requirements.
In several domains of business statistics, a priority will also be the ensuring of data transmission to the Eurostat in the SDMX structure.
One of the main priorities of price statistics will be the transition of price survey of production statistics to a new base period - average of
A preparation of methodology of agricultural land survey and rental prices for agricultural land use is planned.
On the basis of the first data collection of the new research and development indicators, activities will continue on the further development of the survey and its harmonization with international methodology.
Quality reports on research and development statistics will be elaborated for individual sectors dealing with research and development.
In the field of innovations, the survey for 2016 will be prepared and conducted, in terms of harmonized survey in the EU Member States (Community Innovation Survey - CIS 2016).
In the field of energy statistics, activities in implementation of the new requirements on annual surveys resulting from changes of the regulation on energy statistics will continue.
The first mandatory data submission on electricity and gas prices will be realized in accordance with new methodology.
The Office will pay a greater attention to the changes resulting from the approved revised regulations in the field of rail and inland waterways transport in terms of annual surveys adjustment for the areas mentioned and ensuring of the required statistical outputs for the Eurostat.
The SO SR will also aim at ensuring the preparation and realization of ad-hoc sample survey on household fuel consumption.
This concerns mainly: the fulfilment of activities of the National Action Plan to the 2021 Population and Housing Census, submission of a proposal of the legislative intention of the Act on the 2021 Census, field analysis, analyses of registers and administrative sources and the preparation of the 2021 Census with regard to censuses after 2021.
Regarding the implementation of ad-hoc modules into the surveys for the purpose of detailed examination of the specific areas of political interest, the SO SR have applied and in June 2016 signed an agreement with Eurostat on the grant GP 05-16 Preparation for the EU SILC revision - testing of rolling modules in the EU SILC 2017.
In terms of the EU SILC 2017 survey, the goal of this grant will be to test of supplementary variables, which are focused on Labour and on the topic Health (2nd priority), according to the requirement of the ESS regulation for ad-hoc modules.
In March 2018, the grant project will be completed and it is, that by variables testing it will be possible to respond more promptly to the new urgent political Eurostat requirements.
The priorities of 2017 will also be the preparatory works for a revision of the harmonized European Time Use Survey (TUS) for 2020
and the processing and production of outputs from the European surveys on adult education, the AES and on Continuing Vocational Training Survey (CVTS).
The priority of election statistics will be the processing of election results to the bodies of self-government regions.
During the year 2017, the SO SR will start to prepare the processing of election result, schedules, the project of result processing, guidance note, electoral materials and processing of the candidate lists of the individual political subjects, for the needs of the State Commission for Elections and Control of Financing of Political Parties.
Besides these tasks, the SO SR will continuously realize activities regarding the new elections to the local self-government bodies in accordance with the relevant act and on the basis of the Decision of the Speaker of the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
In the field of dissemination, the Office`s long-term goal remains the preparation and provision of high-quality product portfolio and services, covering the requirements not only of the common user but also of more demanding ones.
The Office`s website will be the main communication tool for all forms of statistical information dissemination.
The Office aims at completing a unified public database, called the DATAcube.
In the area of open data access, the Office will focus on the publishing of new datasets, increasing quality of metadata and data formats in terms of fixed standards for Open data.
During selection of new datasets, the Office will take into account the importance and the demand of the general public for the most requested data.
Building relationships with customers will primarily focused on the meetings with statistics users in order to detect their expectations and to improve their knowledge potential in the sphere of statistics.
Activities organized on the occasion of the European Statistics Day can also contribute to that.
Regarding publication activities, a higher emphasis will be put on value-added products and on the use of visual tools allowing better understanding of statistical data for the user.
In accordance with the Office`s strategy, a satisfaction survey of the SO SR will be conducted by independent external agency, in order to determine how is our institution perceived by general public.
The survey of user satisfaction with the SO SR`s products and services will ensure the provision of feedback on the needs, requirements and expectations of customers.
The respondents will be allowed to express their opinions and suggestions about the Office`s activity or about statistical outputs through the online questionnaire.
The survey results will be taken into account during the improvement of products and activities of the Statistical Office.
In the field of international activities, the
Slovak Republic will still be a member of the TRIO Presidency in the Council of the
Therefore, the close cooperation of the SO SR with the Netherlands and Malta will continue within the Council Working Party on Statistics.
In terms of other activities within the European Statistical System, the Office`s international activities will be related to the legislative processes in the EU Council, in particular, to the coordination of positions in relation to the negotiated legislation either within the SR or towards the EU institutions.
In terms of the European Statistical System, the SO SR will aim at improvement of its own activities in the Eurostat`s working parties at various levels and on the organization of the DGINS conference (with participation of the highest representatives of national statistical institutions) in Slovakia in 2019.
During 2017, as in previous years, in the field of human resources management, an urgent challenge will be a motivation of staff to the high-quality quality performance of tasks and sufficiently meeting of the needs of our customers.
The Office will do its best to get their key, efficient and active employees stay.
Staff education and development form their occupational skills and flexibility.
Therefore, the objective of education will be to ensure constant and effective knowledge and skills of managers and other employees, so they will able to professionally, flexibly and impartially fulfil the Office`s key tasks.
A high-quality
staff training for the results processing of elections to the bodies of self-government regions will be a special challenge.
In 2017, in the field of vocational statistical education, we will start to build-up the system of staff education on the basis of individual competence matrices which will be based on levelling the differences between the de facto and required competences of particular employees.
The implementation of competence matrices for statistical positions should help to more efficient activities in the field of human resources management at the line manager level.
In information systems and information and communication technologies, a priority
At the same time, preparation of new projects is planned i.e. the Reform of collection and processing of statistical data in public administration under the Operational Programme the Efficient Public Administration and the project - the Single Information System for collection and analysis of statistical data in the National Statistical System (NSS), which will be realised under the Operational Programme the Integrated infrastructure.
as of Dec.
31 2016
Information Division
Data Collection and
840 00 Bratislava 4
Fax:
949 55 Nitra
Institute of Informatics and Statistics - INFOSTAT
Leškova 16
974 89 Banská Bystrica
Telephone: +421-2-50236 768
Wed
Wed
Fr
Statistical Office of the SR Miletičova 3
824 67 Bratislava Slovak Republic
of the Statistical Office of the SR 2017
ANNUAL REPORT
of the SR 2017
We continue to develop the QMS of the SOSR by implementing the ISO 9001:2015 standard
What was produced the last year in methodology
Cost-optimal database production in NSS and ESS
Priorities 2018
Organizational structure 2017
The most important milestone of the year within this trend was the successful repeated audit confirming a compliance of the quality management system with requirements of the ISO 9001:2015 standard in the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic.
I am glad that the highest appreciation Top Quality Manager of 2017 was granted to the quality manager in our Office.
Using the integrated election information system, we processed comprehensively results of the election to bodies of self-governing regions of the SR and also the additional elections to municipal self-government bodies during the year.
The year 2017 was characterized by increasing rate to prepare a completely new concept of 2021 Population and Housing Census.
For the first time, this comprehensive census will be realized by a combination of administrative data sources and field survey, what supplements the existing model by processing of millions of data from different institutional sources.
Last year, we continued successfully in electronization of processes, what was reflected on administrative burden reducing and on more convenient dates relating to a coordination to submit selected statistical reports from reporting units.
Over the year, we postponed dates of 11 statistical surveys, 56 surveys was available electronically in total.
In order to modernize and unify public databases of the Office, a significant progress was achieved by starting public database DATAcube., which integrated a content availability of statistical data with a possibility to product own outputs for users.
The milestones of 2017
NSS Coordination
Consistent and good functioning National Statistical System (NSS) producing official statistics in compliance with requirements of customers is a strategic priority of the Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (SOSR).
In order to coordinate more efficiently involved parties, the Office carried out a survey in partnership organizations during 2017.
The result of which was a current condition analysis of the institutional environment, processes of statistical production and statistical outputs.
New ISO 9001:2015 standard
In the field of developing the SOSR quality management system, we again concentrated on finishing the implementation of requirements of a new ISO 9001:2015 standard over 2017.
A part of adjustments was also publishing a new SOSR quality Handbook presenting a basic document of the SOSR quality management system.
The compliance of the quality management system with requirements of the ISO 9001:2015 standard was confirmed by the certification audit performed by the organization Bureau Veritas Slovakia in November 2017.
The successful audit confirmed that the SOSR quality management system contributes to further quality improvements of products and services.
An appreciation of the SOSR quality management system was proved by the highest award to the SOSR quality manager - Top quality manager of 2017.
Electronization of processes
Electronization of processes caused administrative burden decrease and harmonization of dates for submission of selected statistical reports with dates of VAT reports, or income tax reports.
In 2017, it was possible to postpone dates of 11 statistical surveys (in 2016 the date was adjusted in 25 surveys).
56 surveys was available electronically in total, what represented 107 statistical forms.
From almost 436 thousand of reports, which represented the total number, 86,44 % was submitted electronically.
Scanner data, new information source
In the field of methodology, the SOSR focused on a modernization of price statistics by using data on consumer prices of supermarket chains, the so-called scanner data, into their production.
In connection with this, a new statistical survey on consumer prices called Transaction data on consumer prices was included to the Program of State Statistical Surveys in order to improve an accuracy and quality of calculations and outputs, to update statistical methods and to answer to trends in the European statistics.
Intensive cooperation with the most significant supermarket chains also continued.
Contribution to 2030 Agenda
The 2030 Agenda approved by the UN and representatives of individual states in 2015 is considered by the Slovak government as an opportunity and tool to define national priorities in the SR development.
The objective is to achieve a sustainable development in the economic, social and environmental area by the implementation of measures till 2030.
Over 2017, the 2030 Agenda implementation continued by a creation of institutional framework integrating all components of the society in the SR.
The SOSR received managing of the Expert Group for Indicators and Monitoring on the base of authorization from the Working Party on 2030 Agenda and National Investment Plan.
The main mandate is elaboration of indicators to national priorities of the 2030 Agenda implementation and cooperation to monitor of a progress in achieving strategic aims.
In 2017, besides others, the effort in the macroeconomic statistics was focused on compilation of annual accounts for 2016 and quarterly accounts (4th quarter of 2016 and the first three quarters of 2017), compilation of regional accounts for 2015 and 2016.
All required data for the spring and autumn data notification within the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP notification) were sent in regular dates.
The Office also delivered data on gross national income (GNI) for purposes of the EU budget preparation in regular September´s date.
Over 2017, three control visits of Eurostat were carried out: to compilation of data on GNI, to EDP notification and to VAT report in order to verify used methods and the data.
In 2017, works on how to prepare the legislative framework FRIBS (Framework Regulation Integrating Business Statistics) integrating the production process of business statistics continued.
Change in a traditional population census
In 2017, a fundamental priority of the SO SR´s activities was the preparation for the 2021 Population and Housing Census (Census 2021) which will be a combination of data from administrative sources, registers and fieldwork.
The new census aims to reduce administrative burden of the population and enhance the quality and efficiency of census data.
The Statistical Office established an interdepartmental analytical team to ensure the use of data and metadata from registers and administrative sources for the 2021 Census.
In December 2017, the Government of the Slovak Republic approved the legislative intention of the Law on the 2021 Population Census taking into account the conclusions of the working groups meetings and negotiations with other central and local government authorities, academic and scientific community and others.
Linking registers
Based on the requirements of the key users,
some of its essential functions have been extended in the RLE´s information system and a methodology of the fulfilment of individual items has been developed, for a more precise and detailed monitoring of changes which have taken place during the existence of subjects registered in the RLE.
In 2016, the RLE has been declared as a reference register by an entry in the list of reference registers, managed by the Deputy Prime Minister´s Office for Investment and Informatization of the SR.
United databases
In 2017, there was significant progress in the field of modernisation and unification of the Office´s public databases.
The integration of the Slovstat database into a uniform public database DATAcube. comprehensively addressed the uniform content availability of statistical data for customers with the ability to create their own outputs.
The new web application DATAcube. brought uniform user interface and data access.
In the field of European affairs, the SOSR puts emphasis on its effective functioning within the European Statistical System, as well as on the active participation in the adoption of the European statistical legislation.
In 2017, the Office´s experts played an active role and within the EU, they attended important meetings and seminars of Eurostat, actively participated in 100 working groups and committees, 22 task force, 15 seminars and workshops, 7 courses of European statisticians (ESTP) and 6 events related to the implementation of grant projects.
The Office submitted a tender for 13 new grant projects co-financed by the EU which were fo
cused on the application of new statistical instruments and methods.
In 2017, in total, 25 projects have been implemented together with those from the previous year.
There was active cooperation and exchange of experiences in various fields with the Czech, Polish and Hungarian colleagues.
Cooperation with the OECD and UN continued as well.
On April 8, 2017 and October 14, 2017, new elections to municipal bodies were held (by-elections to the bodies of mu
nicipal/local and city councils), altogether in 48 municipalities.
In total, 24 new mayors and 34 new MPs were elected.
The Integrated Election Information System has been used for the processing of results.
The SR commemorated the European Statistics Day also in 2017, on 20 October which helps to raise awareness of European citizens about the importance and values of statistics for the society.
In November, the Office presented its most interesting products and services in the exhibition Bibliotheca/Pedagogica 2017 in Bratislava.
The main aim of the presentation was to familiarize the general public with the Office´s activities.
A statistical quiz for primary school pupils was organized in cooperation with the Radio and Television of Slovakia and the TV programme the Dwarfs.
A workshop called Challenges of official statistics in 2017 focused on the administrative data sources, register of legal persons and its use in the 2021 Population Census was intended for the partner central government authorities and academic community.
SOSR1: a) develops and publishes the policy of national statistics, b) compiles the Programme of State Statistical Surveys in co-operation with ministries and state organizations, c) defines methodology of statistical surveys, collects and processes statistical data, d) defines methodology for maintenance of the system of national accounts and compiles national accounts, e) sets up, releases and keeps classifications, nomenclatures and registers in co-operation with the ministries and state authorities, f) defines the method of setting up the registers, assigns and issues identification numbers, g) elaborates analyses of selected characteristics of the social, economic and environmental development of the SR, h) co-operates with international bodies and organizations in introduction of standards and classifications in the field of statistics,
i) publishes the results of statistical surveys for the SR and individual geographical and administrative units, regularly informs general public about social, economic and demographic development, provides statistical information and issues statistical publications, j) organizes and provides project and programme preparation of the statistical surveys processing and determines the method of collection and technologies of the statistical data processing for statistical surveys conducted by the Office, k) manages, regulates and oversees collection and statistical data processing at national level, l) provides methodological assistance to national statistics or to European statistics acquired by ministries, other central government authorities, state organizations, local self-government units and bodies governed by public law upon written request,
telephone (operator) +421 2 50236 211 internet
We continue in developing the QMS of the SOSR by implementing the ISO 9001:2015 standard
Last period, in the field of developing the
SOSR quality management system, we fo
Related standard requirements were put into practice by implementing re-evaluated descriptions of processes, the risk management actions, such as risk analysis outputs, as well as by supporting the systematic approach to management of external providers.
Implementation of new standard requirements was included finally in a new issue of the SOSR Quality Handbook presenting a basic document of the SOSR quality management system.
The compliance of the quality management system with the requirements of the ISO 9001:2008 standard was examined by the certification audit performed by the organization Bureau Veritas Slovakia, spol. s.r.o. in November 2017.
We continue in developing the QMS of the SOSR by implementing the ISO 9001:2015 standard
quality improvement of product and services provided to customers and for the Office development to higher efficiency.
An appreciation of the SOSR quality management system, except of the mentioned certificate, was proved by the highest award to the SOSR quality manager - Top quality manager of 2017 in the public administration sector, which is granted by the Slovak Office of Standards, Metrology and Testing based on the recommendations of a special commission.
The Information System for Monitor
for individual statistical projects.
The SOSR participated also in activities
related to resources at the level of the European Statistical System (ESS).
It partici
pated actively in the Eurostat Resource Directors‘ Group and was involved in creating the common methodology relating to a cost definition to products of the European Statistical Program.
In 2017, the first round of this cost definition to selected products of ESP was done.
The target of this initiative was to obtain information on costs spent on ESP individual products in order to use more efficiently resources in the European statistics´ production.
What was produced the last year in the field of methodology
series, and also to developers of the program JDemetra+ (the official program for seasonal analysis recommended by Eurostat).
Testing the newest version of the Program JDemetra+, basic functions of the program and also increasing the functions of the software graphical landmark continued last year.
Documentation checking, comments and adjustments to the new version and discussions on how the topic seasonal time series analysis put near to a public continued as well.
Other activities, such as a preparation of micro data files to the scientific purposes for researchers, providing a methodological assistance to the students dealing with confidential statistical data in the safe centre of the Office and an active participation in the Eurostat Expert Group on Statistical Disclosure Control, related to statistical disclosure control.
Furthermore, the program of confidential statistical data protection in the tourism statistics aimed at a considerable increase of the released monthly data volume was prepared by the Department of Statistical Survey Methods in cooperation with the Department of the Methodology and Synthesis of Business Statistics.
In the field of methodology, activities connected with a price statistics´ modernization continued in involving data on consumer prices of supermarket chains, the so-called scanner data, into their production.
In connection with this, a new survey on consumer prices called Transaction data of consumer prices was included in the Program of State Statistical Surveys in order to improve an accuracy and quality of calculations and outputs, to update statistical methods and to answer to trends in the European statistics.
Activities dealt by the project team last year related mainly to a mutual connection of the internal classifications of supermarket chains and statistical classifications, a data analysis as well as to testing their processing and to a cooperation on how to plan a functional specification of the software solution.
In the field of seasonal time series analy
sis, the SOSR activities relating to a membership in the Seasonal Adjustment User Group were going on.
This working group is a supporting and supervising body to the Seasonal Adjustment Centre of Excellence for seasonal analysis and adjustment of time
What was produced the last year in the ﬁeld of methodology
Attention was also paid to a deeper analysis of the topic calibration of weights of statistical surveys and to development of a sophisticated calibration tool, which should be published in 2018.
In connection to the grant project implementation aimed at a calculation of the
variation coefficients of annual and year
on-year estimates in the Labour Force Sample Survey, the calculation program of these coefficients, usage of which increases needs of this survey and can be used in a wider range, was developed.
Regarding the internal requirements of de
Excepting standard processing of sample surveys, activities of business statistics were aimed at a further harmonization of statistical outputs from individual surveys in enterprises and at a cooperation on processing the agricultural Farm Census conducted regularly every 5 years.
direct professional consultations to dif
In 2017, 56 surveys were available electronically, which represented 107 statistical forms.
In order to improve the communication
with reporting units, the SOSR prepared a directed feedback provided in selected statistical fields via so called visual statisticsinfographics.
In order to improve the quality of its activity in this field, it has prepared and will conduct and evaluate a user survey of satisfaction with the electronic data collection and with the communication with employees of the Office in 2018.
ing administrative data sources (ADS) and
continued to implement the Concept of ADS usage.
In 2017, some internal trainings for SOSR employees were realized under its administration.
Trainings focused on drafts and processing of sample surveys were also carried out.
There is a permanent high interest to participate in both trainings.
What was produced the last year in the field of methodology
data and information sources in order to decrease response burden of statistical surveys, to increase the quality of national statistics and to reduce costs.
This aim was realized via providing a methodological assistance to reporting units in order to correctly interpret and use statistical classifications and codes in the process of statistical surveys.
In the field of statistical registers, activities were concentrated on a development and quality improvement of the statistical register of organizations and the register of enterprise groups as basic registers for an implementation of the European methodology of enterprise profiling and for production of statistics on globalization.
The systematic usage of functions for collective updating of statistical registers developed and conducted in the integrated statistical information system ISIS REGIS had a significant impact on the quality of registers.
Cooperating with Eurostat, works continued to develop the register of multinational enterprise groups managed by Eurostat in the system of EuroGroups Register (EGR).
Their outcome is the final EGR 2015 population, which was completed and made accessible by Eurostat for statistical purposes in the first months of 2017.
Participating in the project Steps towards implementing the definition of statistical units for business statistics and profiling in the framework of the ESS.
VIP ESBRs project resulted in creating additional profiles of 10 multinational enterprise groups with a decision-making centre in the Slovak Republic and 30 profiles of groups represented by the Slovak units though with a decision-making centre outside the Slovak Republic.
Another equally important result of the project is a possibility to influence existing developed European methodology of the enterprise profiling in order to take national requirements to production of business statistics into consideration.
of those source registers whose data should be provided by the end of October 2017 in order to meet the demands of the RLE.
Based on requirements of key users, some of its basic functions were extended in the RLE information system and a methodology on how to fulfil individual items in order to monitor more exactly changes occurred during the existence of subjects registered in the RLE.
A cooperation with administrators of source registers continued in the field of identification of subjects and quality control of the data registered in relevant source registers before these data migration to the RLE via a generic register.
During the whole year,
based on requirements of liable persons, codes were adjusted for purposes of the registration of subjects in the RLE.
In the transition period, which the administrators of source registers used on a technical and subject preparation connecting with mandatory data provision to the RLE, a generation of the organization identification number was realized fully by the IS of the RLE and the generic register functions.
Cost-optimal database production in NSS and ESS
for 2015-2017 (hereinafter referred to as “PSSS”), which is harmonized with the Eu
ropean Statistical Programme for 2013
The state statistical surveys of the SOSR, ministries and national authorities and the administrative data sources used for statistical purposes are specified in three annexes.
Based on negotiations between the SOSR representatives and the Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic relating to an improvement of the European statistics´ production in the field of combined electricity and heat production and remote control heating and cooling, a close cooperation was required.
The SOSR included the Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic to the list of authorities comprising the NSS and to the list of other national authorities contributing to the development, production and dissemination of the European statistics after evaluating the impacts of this cooperation.
asked the General Director of Eurostat for displaying the additional national authorities on its website: http://ec.europa.eu/ eurostat/web/european-statistical-system/ overview.
Statistical Office of the SR
Ministry of Transport and Construction of the SR
Ministry of Culture of the SR
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development of the SR Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR
Ministry of Education, Research, Science and Sport of the SR
Ministry of Interior of the SR Ministry of Health of the SR
Administration of State Material
Reserves of the SR
Institute of Informatics and Statistics
Cost-optimal database production in NSS and ESS
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Administration of State Material
The year 20017 was the last year in programming period defined for 2015 and 2017.
of Acts in compliance with the Act on State Statistics and in cooperation with ministries and national authorities.
All valid annual state statistical surveys and all valid surveys with multi-annual periodicity, which shall be conducted in 2018 to 2020, were included to PSSS.
The SOSR included a new state statistical survey TDSC 2-52 Transaction data of consumer prices, which will officially start from 2019, to the Annex No 1 of PSSS.
The aim is to improve statistical production by usage of new data sources and new data collection methods and processing in the field of price statistics.
Ministries included 4 new surveys to the Annex No 2 of PSSS.
In 2017, the list of institutions managed and
published by Eurostat included, besides the SOSR, other national authorities responsible for the development, production and dissemination of the European statistics in the SR:
Cost-optimal database production in NSS and ESS
C (MZ SR) 5-01 Annual report on activity of algeziology.
Reporting units will be freed from a duty to submit A (MZ SR) 1-01 Annual statistical report on ambulance activity.
The Ministry of Culture of the Slovak Republic added two new surveys Kult (MK SR) 20-01 Annual report on multimedia industry and Kult (MK SR) 21-01 Annual report on specialized designer activities.
The statistical survey objective is to obtain information on the Slovak multimedia works and their creation, distribution information and information on specialized designer activities in the Slovak Republic.
The public, which could send proposals or comments to a subject of the document in a phase of the legislative regulation preparation, was also engaged to the law-making process.
The public was informed on preparing the decree proposal, by which PSSS is issued on 2018 to 2020, via a provisional information displayed on the legal and information portal Slov-Lex.
Two consultations required by business subjects were held in the form of working meetings.
In order to strengthen the development, production and dissemination of the national statistics and the NSS partnership, a position, tasks and composition of the Statistical Council (further only “Council”) changed.
The revised standing order and the Council statute took into effect 1st September 2017.
The Council will firstly deal with the PSSS, the NSS coordination and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It will comment professionally on a direction of national statistics, statistical product portfolio, significant programs and other fields of statistics.
In 2016, the SR Government started an implementation process of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in the Slovak Republic and also continued intensively in 2017.
The main mandate of the Expert Group is to prepare indicators to national priorities of the 2030 Agenda implementation and to cooperate in monitoring of these indicators.
GDP - constant prices of previous year GDP - constant prices calculated by chain-linked volumes
National accounts comprise a compatible framework for systematic and detailed description of the economy where all levels of the economic process (production, creation and division of pensions and their usage, accumulation and financial transactions) are recorded.
In conditions of the Slovak Republic, national accounts are compiled according to the ESA 2010 methodology, which is
an established abbreviation for the European System of National and Regional Accounts.
Development of the national accounts system is in compliance with new European Union regulations and directives as one of the main objectives of the macroeconomic statistics.
External Trade Statistics provide important input data in order to construct the key macro-economic aggregates.
Poznámka: - ESA 2010 methodology - constant prices calculated by chain-linked volumes with reference year 2010 - year 2017 is a quarterly estimate (quarters in total per a year)
- state to 7.3.2018
Within standard works in national accounts, based on the statistical reporting information, administrative data sources and additional information as well, the annual national and sector accounts for 2016, regional data for 2015 and 2016 and inputoutput tables (IOT) for 2014 were compiled and sent fully according to the transmission programme in compliance with the Eurostat requirements.
The standard autumn revision of data for the years 2015 and 2014 was conducted and released in compliance with the revision policy available at the website of the SOSR.
Data on flash estimate of gross domestic product (GDP) and employment were compiled within 45 days once the reference
quarter ended and were delivered to Eurostat and were also accessible to our domestic users.
More detailed data on quarterly national accounts are compiled and regularly released at the website of the SOSR within 65 days once the reference quarter ended.
Data on quarterly national accounts were seasonally adjusted by a standard method in compliance with the European Union legislation.
Press conference relating to quarterly data of national accounts and discussion with professional public were always organized on the release date to specify some aspects of the macroeconomic development.
GDP - current prices
GDP - constant prices calculated by chain-linked volumes
notification), data in notification tables including the EDP questionnaire and other required information provided standardly to Eurostat for quality evaluation of the SR fiscal data were sent in regular dates.
EU Member States are required to provide data on VAT (3. own source) and data on gross national income (4. own source) for the preparation of the EU budget.
Data on VAT are provided by the Ministry of Finance of the SR, while the Section of Macroeconomic Statistics is usually preparing input materials in the form of data on compensation for small companies exempted from VAT and data on weighted average VAT rate (WAR).
In regular September´s date, data on gross national income (GNI) and also a description of changes and amendments of methodological procedures to compilation of GDP/GNI were sent to Eurostat.
Based on GNI data and the key laid down by the European regulation, each Member State´s contribution to the EU budget is calculated.
Data on administrative purposes (EDP, GNI, VAT) provided to the Commission are checked by regular visits of Eurostat in order to verify used methods and compiled data.
In 2017, visits of Eurostat to all of the three topics took place in Slovakia.
The mission to the VAT report was finished without reservations in the SOSR to December 2017, action points realizing currently with different deadlines followed from the missions to EDP and GNI.
Interim reports on task fulfilment required by the grant project agreement were prepared and sent to Eurostat in deadlines set.
Within a cooperation with the Department of Price Statistics, works on activities of the grant project GP 09-14 Provision of basic information on purchasing power parities finished and works on the another project (GP 07-16) relating to this topic started.
Over 2017, several working meetings were organized with colleagues from the Czech Statistical Office.
The meetings were aimed at exchange of experiences concerning the ESA 2010 methodology and relations with a balance of payment.
Besides the scheduled tasks, if possible, employees of the National Accounts Section dealt with current issues within inter-ministry working groups.
Much of our work related to a completion of different questionnaires for international organizations (CMFB, Eurostat, ILO, OECD, UNECE, others) as well as to a preparation of documents for economic analyses of ministries and national institutions (IFP, MF SR, NBS, ME SR and others).
to deadlines set in 2017.
The Office also prepared a publishing of seasonally adjusted data on external trade statistics and as well aggregated data in geographical and commodity classification, which will be
released in 2018.
The external trade data according to business characteristics were delivered to Eurostat before regular date and in required quality, thus Eurostat could release it at once.
We participated actively in discussions on prepared changes in compilation of external trade statistics.
The proposal of the Regulation on European Business Statis
tics (FRIBS) encompassing the external trade statistics as well implements planned modernising of the Intrastat system from legislative point of view and introduces exchange of microdata on intra-EU exports among the EU Member States including ID partner in the Member State of intra-EU imports.
The regulation will also allow more freely to use different data sources in compiling intra-EU imports´ statistics.
The proposed measures should result in an overall reduction of response burden of reporting units of the Intrastat system while maintaining data quality.
In relation to a preparation of implementing regulations, changes in coding of Trade Categories and in rules for specific moves and goods and many stimulating proposals were submitted to Eurostat.
In 2017, the guide specified for the reporting units of the Intrastat system was updated and reporting units participated in 3 seminars in different towns attended by 55 persons over the year.
Besides the basic information on the Intrastat system, participants extended knowledge on the latest legislative changes and got also answers to specific questions concerning data reporting.
The Consulting Unit of the Intrastat system realized weekly 126 calls and e-mails on average to provide individual consultations to reporting units.
Collected data were intensively verified in the same way by the staff of the Regional Office in Trnava all year long.
In business short-term statistics, activities
were mostly focused mostly on how to ensure processing and dissemination of outputs to national users in compliance with the requirements and a timetable of the First Release Calendar and the Edition Program and data transmission to Eurostat by means of the eDAMIS web portal.
We also concentrated on a preparation of time series of key indicators describing a short-term development of the individual sectors in connection with the implementation of a new base period of 2015 and on a technical form change of data transmission to Eurostat in SDMXML form.
In 2017, works regarding the calculation of Index of Services Production in the Eurostat grant project were finalized.
A regular updating of metadata files via ESS - Metadata Handler was provided standardly in compliance with the requirements and in deadline set by Eurostat.
Metadata reports on short-term statistics´ indicators of the Slovak Republic were evaluated as the best among the member and accessing countries and Eurostat recommended them to the other member countries as a model example.
Evaluating the total compatibility with the Regulation on Short-term Statistics, the SOSR is constantly included in the first category of member countries with the highest compatibility level.
In structural business statistics, required
outputs of annual structural business statistics, which were necessary to define weight
structures of short-term business statistics, were transmitted to Eurostat.
Standard files of the final indicators for reference period of 2015 and preliminary data for 2016 on a population of the sector of nonfinancial and financial corporations were provided to Eurostat and to national users.
In statistics of domestic and non-domestic
foreign affiliates, statistical outputs for reference year 2015 were compiled and transmitted to Eurostat in required quality and in deadline set.
Structured quality reports for reference year 2014 were elaborated in all required fields.
In statistics of industry, regarding its decisive share in the gross domestic product production in the SR economy, works aimed at a data analysis of statistical surveys conducted in short-term and long-term periodicity in the calendar year 2017 continued.
The required statistical outputs to Eurostat and the specific requirements in terms of a structure of outputs defined from national and also international institutions were processed.
Preparatory works started in the Eurostat project, aim of which is to improve data consistency and integration in business statistics in terms of production and statistics on output between statistics of industry and external trade statistics with goods.
In the field of agricultural statistics, works on the Farm Structure Survey 2016 project continued.
It mostly related to collection, processing of data obtained from reporting units and validation at different levels.
Coincident with the structural survey implementation, legislative process and discussion to a new proposal of the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Regulation on Integrated Farm Statistics, which will replace current legislative rules of the structural surveys from 2020, continued at the level of EU.
Representatives of agricultural statistics actively participated in the proposal preparation by comments.
Works on regular annual compilation and releasing of harvest estimate of selected crops were carried out.
To compile the Economic Agricultural Account of the SR, which is a satellite account of the National Accounts, an active cooperation regarding the provision and processing of data necessary for its compilation continued together with the
Production of cereals in Slovakia for 2017 in tonnes
Wheat
Barley
Corn
Rye
Oat
Other cereals
Final results of the account for 2016 were published in September 2017.
The sector statistics of construction, hous
ing, trade and services focused on pro
cessing of statistical outputs according to requirements of Eurostat, international organizations and requirements defined by the national users.
Increased attention was also paid to updating and improving the quality of released metadata, as well as to statistical data displaying at the SOSR´s website and in information system databases.
Activities aimed at improving the database and processing of the statistical information on started, unfinished and finished dwellings required by a wide spectrum of users continued.
In transport, information and commu
nication statistics, except providing data from statistical surveys required for database creation, works were also focused on preparation of a new survey in inland water passenger transport.
Outputs in accordance with the requirements of the EU regulations and requirements of national users were provided.
We actively attended negotiations and commenting of draft versions in order to be a part in preparations for the Eurostat guidelines relating to the 10 selected fields for a united approach to the Manual implementation in the EU countries.
In 2017, the first data collection of new indicators was conducted, the quality report of research and development statistics in individual sectors of research and development was prepared, and the data transmission in relevant questionnaires was done for the first time in new SDMX form.
The field of innovations prepared and realized the survey within the harmonized survey of the EU Member States (Community Innovation Survey - CIS 2016).
We participated in a current preparation phase of the model form specified for the EU Member States on the next CIS 2018 and in a revision of the Oslo Manual as well.
In energy statistics, besides standard implementation of requirements on outputs and data transmission to Eurostat databases, International Energy Agency and the UN Statistical Division according to the EU regulations, the first compulsory data submission on the Physical Energy Flow Account (PEFA) and also the first part of data on electricity and natural gas prices by a new methodology were conducted.
Another activities were focused on providing new compulsory data on fuels and energy consumption in households.
In 2017, statistics of environment successfully finished an implementation of the action programme, which is aimed at an introduction
of the three new compulsory environmental accounts- the Environmental Protection Expenditure Accounts (EPEA), the Environmental Goods and Services Sector Accounts (EGSS) and the Physical Energy Flow Accounts (PEFA).
We early accomplished reporting duty followed from the EU Regulation on Environmental Economic Accounts.
The publication Environmental Accounts - Account of material flows was issued.
In 2017, the sample statistical survey on fuel consumption in households was realized in order to obtain information on heating in family houses being important for an estimation of air pollutant emissions.
The statistical survey results will be used in the project aimed at increasing the quality of the Air Emission Account of the Slovak Republic, which SHMI cooperating with
the SOSR is dealt with.
Works on an implementation of changes resulting from the Act on Waste continued and a new module focused on obtaining data on collection methods and fees for municipal waste from households was included to the statistical report on municipal waste from a village in 2017.
The field of tourism statistics was focused on releasing standard statistical outputs for external users, as well as processing a huge range of non-standard outputs on tourism development in accommodation facilities, organized tourism, domestic and external tourism.
Compilation of tourism satellite accounts tables supplemented by the reference year 2015, which were released in shortened deadline, was carried out.
Municipal waste composition in the SR in 2016
Components of municipal separated waste collection Garden and park waste Municipal solid waste
The revision of weight schemes was realized in surveys of agricultural prices, construction prices and prices of market services, a base for this revision was the structure of these sectors in 2015.
Time series in the survey on price indices of industrial producers to a new base period and the survey methodology of prices in agricultural land and in prices of agricultural land rental were prepared as well.
Consumer price statistics paid attention to preparing usage of new accessible data sources, such as data from supermarket chains and data accessible on Internet.
These data were used as a supplementary data source in order to create the consumer basket on 2018.
The survey
methodology of commercial real estate prices including a calculation of the first experimental indices was prepared.
In 2017, price statistics´ data dissemination was added by price indices of dwelling real estates and by price indices of selected market services.
In business and consumer surveys being
a part of the international project Business and Consumer Surveys organized by the European Commission, attention was paid to improving the input and also output data quality in 2017.
Core inflation in %
Regulated prices in %
Business statistics
mental comment procedure and the SOSR expressed its opinion to the proposal and clause of influences to the Estonian Presidency.
In November 2017, two working meetings with colleagues from the Czech Statistical Office were held at the SOSR in Bratislava.
The first bilateral working meeting to trade, catering and accommodation statistics was focused on exchange of experiences in the field of implementing Eurostat requirements, on re-calculation of time series to a new base period, on problems of Internet trade and publishing data at national level in terms of level of details and also other activities relating to data processing and publishing.
The topic of the second meeting was discussing the future requirements of the draft regulation on the European Business Statistics.
The cooperation with the international
The Regulation was submitted to interdepart
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Demography and social statistics
In 2017, in the field of population statistics, involving demographic statistics, population censuses, statistics of social protection, culture and criminality statistics, the system of data processing, analysis and modern data dissemination further developed.
In the context of current trends in the use of administrative data sources and registers, the options of data harmonisation from the administrative sources and registers with the demographic statistics data were examined.
The demographic development of the population in 2016 was the main topic of the press conference of the SOSR held in June 2017.
The population development was documented also by publishing of books issued as part of the series We in Numbers: Population Change 2016, International Migration 2016.
In the edition of analytical series Statistics in Contexts, the Main Trends of Population Development in the SR in 2016 and the Social Protection in the SR were issued as the standard analytical publishing outputs.
Population increases
Crude rate of natural increase in the SR districts, 2016
Within the project the 2021 Population and Housing Census (Census 2021), the Steering Committee of the SOSR approved at its meeting on June 28, 2017 that the Census 2021 will be based on the concept of the integrated census.
Complex analyses of registers and administrative data sources were conducted for the census purposes.
With regard to potential uses in the statistical processing of the 2021 Census results and as an instrument of control and coherence, analyses of the Register of natural persons, Central Registry of the insured persons of public health insurance, Information System of the Social Insurance Institution, Information System of the Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the SR and Information System of the Office of Labour, Social Affairs and Family were performed.
The first meeting was held on June 26, 2017, involving all the nominated members (representatives from the Ministry of Interior of the SR, Health Care Surveillance Authority, Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the SR, Social Insurance Company, The Geodesy, Cartography, and Cadastre of the SR, Directorate General of the Judiciary Guards and Prison Wardens Crops, Data Protection Office of the SR, SOSR).
In the production of the legislative initiative of the Act on the 2021 Population and Housing Census conclusions of the meetings of the Working Groups of the SOSR and negotiations with other central government and regional authorities, academic and scientific communities and other organisations were taken into account.
Statistics on labour cost compiled informa
tion on the average nominal and real monthly wage on a quarterly basis for the calculation of the successive indicators in the social field.
Detailed annual data on the level and structure of wages by education, age groups and employment were processed.
Data on gender pay gap, share of employees in wage zones, median wage and the average monthly net wage were also released.
The regional earnings survey according to workplaces in districts was also compiled.
Information on the monthly and annual wages was supplemented by detailed data on further expenses of organisations related to labour force recruitment.
Labour statistics ensured and provided quarterly and annual information on employment, unemployment and economic inactivity from the Labour Force Sample Survey in households (LFSS).
In the 2.quarter, the ad hoc survey of the LFS on entrepreneurship was conducted whose results will contribute to better information on the progress towards the fulfilment of the EU 2020 objectives in the field of entrepreneurship promotion with the purpose to increase the employment rate.
The SR has also been involved in the project aimed at the preparation and testing of the ad hoc survey of the LFS on transition to retirement which will be a part of the planned system of 8-year modules of the LFS.
The aim of the other project was the improvement of the accuracy reviewing of the LFS results by means of the design and testing of methodology and program solutions for the calculation of variability of annual estimations and net annual changes of employment and
In labour statistics, the availability of structural information, mainly on the number of employees, hours worked and job vacancies were provided.
The activities were carried out in terms of the current EU legislation and according to Eurostat recommendations.
After validation by Eurostat, the outcomes were included in the database of internationally comparable data within the EU and publications with analytical and tabulated parts were processed.
Family accounts statistics collects data on in
come, expenditure, consumption and the composition of private households in the SR.
In 2017, a survey on income and household composition in the SR in the 1st quarter was conducted.
By means of the available external information, prognoses and qualified estimations of selected indicators, data estimation for 2016 was carried out by microdata simulation of the 2015 survey.
sample Survey on Income and Living Conditions of Households, which is the main
Recently, a strong emphasis has been put on the production and analysis of the main indicator of poverty and social exclusion for the strategy EU 2020 for the SR, formed by the combination of three partial indicators: the at-risk-of-poverty rate, severe material deprivation rate and low work intensity rate.
According to the EU SILC 2016 results released last year, 18,1% of the Slovak population were at risk of poverty or social exclusion.
With regard to the introduction of special ad hoc modules to sample surveys in households based on new requirements, a new
grant project Preparation for the Revision of EU SILC-testing of ad hoc rolling modules in the EU SILC 2017 has been implemented.
The aim of this project was to prepare and carry out a testing of additional variables focused on the topic Health (2 priority) and Labour, as required by the regulation for ad hoc modules within the EU SILC 2017.
Currently, the grant project has been finalised and it is expected to be finished by the end of March 2018.
The survey was conducted in April - May 2017, in 4 680 randomly selected households in the territory of the Slovak Republic.
At household level, the equipment of households with
18,1 % - Indicator of poverty or social exclusion
at-risk-of poverty rate
severe material deprivation rate
low labour intensity rate
at-risk-of poverty rate or social exclusion
individual dimensions of poverty
Demography and social statistics
information-communication technologies was surveyed.
Among individuals, the information was obtained on the computer use and Internet activities.
Within Internet use, more detailed data were surveyed on e-commerce, as well as order and purchase of goods and services through the Internet and e-government use for private purposes.
Furthermore, respondents were also surveyed in terms of knowledge and use of information-communication technologies.
In 2017, an increased attention was paid to the use of specialised websites and mobile applications through which goods or services within “sharing economy” are provided.
These data are freely available for users in the SO SR´s database in a comparable time series since 1990.
Data on food consumption for
the year 2016 were also included in the publication Food Consumption in the SR, issued annually by the SOSR which also assesses the development of food consumption in the SR and compared with the EU Member States as well.
Data on food consumption are regular part of the situational outlook reports of the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR, evaluating the market development in the SR for individual food commodities.
In 2017, the SOSR successfully completed the grant project Preparatory works for the revision of the Harmonised European Time-Use Surveys (TUS) for the year 2020, by means of which the Office became involved in resolving the task of Eurostat related to the next wave of the time survey in 2020.
The SOSR collects, processes and provides data in terms of health expenditure for the SR according to the methodology of the System of Health Accounts (SHA) since 2005 (the reference year 2003 and further).
According to this regulation, the SOSR in 2017, provided data for the reference year 2015, within the accounting framework of the SHA 2011 methodology.
The processed data for 2015 were submitted to Eurostat, OECD and WHO within a joint questionnaire.
The data published serve as a comparison of health expenditure not only within the European Union but also in the OECD and WHO countries.
Data are also released at the website of the SO SR.
In 2017, the SOSR ensured at the Division of elections statistics, processing the results of the Elections to the bodies of self-governing regions of the Slovak Republic and the results of the new elections to municipal bodies (byelections to the bodies of municipal/local and city councils).
On November 4, 2017, the Elections to the bodies of self-governing regions were held
Election statistics
The SOSR has been preparing the processing of election results during the entire 2017.
Specialised summary units of the district and selfgoverning electoral commissions and the State Commission for Elections and the Control of Financing of Political Parties, were established to ensure the processing.
The preparation included three tests verifying the organizationaltechnical and the personal preparedness of the specialised summary units.
The final results of the Elections to the selfgoverning regions were processed by specialised summary units of the district election commissions on the basis of local election commissions' minutes.
From the recorded minutes of the local election commissions, the minutes of the district election commissions were processed by summarization and approved by the commissions.
Based on the minutes of district election commissions, the minutes of the election districts of selfgoverning regions were processed and subse
quently approved.
The presidents of the selfgoverning regions were elected for the first time in a one-round election.
On April 8, 2017 and October 14, 2017, new elections to municipal bodies were held (by
The new elections were held altogether in 48 municipalities, in both dates.
In total, 24 new mayors and 34 new MPs were elected.
In 2017, the Integrated Election Information
Employees of the SOSR´s regional offices, played a significant role in the fulfilment of the tasks at the Division of election statistics, as the members of specialised summary units of the districts election commissions.
In 2017, the INFOSTAT resolved 28 research and development tasks consisting of 77 partial outputs focused mainly on the following:
methodological solutions - compi
lation of the Tourism Satellite Account (TSA) for the year 2015; programming solutions for energy statistics;
updating and development - of the
Blaise software for the tourism modules and changes into the processing of price statistics with monthly and quarterly periodicity;
calculations and constructions - pro
analyses, studies, prognosis, surveys
cooperation on the balance of IOT for 2014 and 2015 in the SNA-NT system, analysis and prognosis of the development of business cycle in the Slovak economy in 2017; compilation of tables of tourism satellite account for the year 2015;
Within the cooperation with the INFOSTAT,
particularly the activities of the Demographic Research Centre (DRC) should be
mentioned, which in 2017, resolved or participated in 7 tasks in total, assigned by the Statistical Office of the SR, under the contract, resulting in analytical and methodological materials.
The studies were as follows:
Assessment of quality and the definition of quality indicators in the integration of data sources focused on the 2021 Population and Housing Census
Assessment of quality of administrative data sources in the conditions of Slovak statistics
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
Cooperation with the Institute of Informatics and Statistics
Construction of analytical indicators for selected demographic processes
Cross-sectional and cohort tables of demographic family-related and life events
Estimation of the educational structure of the Slovak population by gender and age units as of 31 December 2016
The cooperation with the SOSR, activities of the INFOSTAT and the DRC in 2017 is documented in detail in the annual report of the Institute for the year 2017 at the websites www.infostat.sk and www.infostat.sk/vdc.
In terms of customer service provision, the SOSR continued in fulfilling the action programmes set out in the strategic objectives of the Office.
It carried out activities in accordance with the approved Marketing Plan of the SOSR for the year 2017 by means of which it aimed to efficiently satisfy the demands of its customers.
Within the product portfolio for 2017, the
SOSR ensured the provision of data sets for domestic and international customers based
on the requirements of individual institutions.
During the year, in total, 533 products were provided to national and international organizations in the form of pre-defined tables, data sets and various questionnaires.
From the domestic customers, it concerned, above all, the legislative and executive authorities of state administration, mainly the National Bank of Slovakia (40% of products), the Ministry of Finance of the SR, the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the SR, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of the SR, the Ministry of Economy of the SR and the Ministry of Transport, Construction and Regional Development of the SR.
In total, 236 data sets in different periodicity were provided to national organizations.
The obtained statistical information was used in analyses of the social and economic development of the society and for its governance and decision-making processes.
The provision of products for international
and inter-governmental organizations concerned predominantly Eurostat (81%).
Other data consumers were the United Nations, the Organisation for International Cooperation and Development, the International Energy Agency, the International Transport Forum and the Food and Agriculture Organization.
In total, 297 products were provided to the international organizations, during the year 2017.
Marketing activities were aimed at knowledge
Professional units at the Central Office and in the Regional Offices of the SOSR, organized workshops, presentations, discussions and lectures with debates.
These events were attended particularly by students and teachers of secondary schools and universities, representatives of the central bodies of state administration, local self-governments and financial institutions.
During the year, in total, 53 events were organized by the Office with participation of more than 2400 existing or potential users of statistics.
Customers were presented with the structure and content of the Office´s internet portal, databases, the range of statistical products and services, forms of their dissemination as well as the possibilities and restrictions of the use of statistical information.
Customers obtained information on the organization of statistical surveys and on the methodologies in the processing of statistical data.
We serve customers
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
On this occasion, a website was established with the Office´s activities, at its Internet portal.
The main activity was the presentation in the exhibition Bibliotheca/ Pedagogica 2017, in Bratislava, at the Incheba exhibition centre in November 2017.
The event was designed to raise awareness of the official statistics and the work of the SOSR among the general public.
The visitors could familiarize themselves with the Office´s products and services and also applying in practice the data search in online databases.
Selected publications from various statistical fields and promotional materials have been available to them.
A historic edition of publications and yearbooks was also part of the exhibition.
An accompanying event was a statistical quiz for primary school pupils, organized in cooperation with the Radio and Television of Slovakia, involving the well-known characters of the TV programme the Dwarfs.
Children have become acquainted with the fundamentals of statistics.
Regional Offices supported the European Statistics Day by accompanying events for selected user groups, mainly students, in order to raise their awareness and statistical literacy.
During the year, the SOSR satisfied 3472 requests for statistical information from various thematic areas by means of the information provision departments.
At the Central Office of the SO SR, 2241 requests were met, of which 85% were from domestic and 15% from foreign customers.
The most requests were from students and representatives of the business community, associations, syndicates and trade unions (equally by 22%).
The share of requests from international and foreign organisations constituted 16% and of state and local government 14%.
There were fewer requests from the customers of financial institutions.
According to thematic areas, the highest interest was recorded for the information in the field of demography and social statistics (36%).
A considerable interest was shown also for sectoral statistics, mainly by students and the business sector.
The demanding requirements included also the requests for anonymised microdata for scientific purposes
Monthly development of satisfied requests Central Office and Regions
(during the year, 16 contracts were concluded for their provision).
In total, 1231 requests for statistical information were met by the Regional Offices of the SOSR for statistical information, the majority of them for the local selfgovernments and public administration (34%) and for students (29 %).
The customer services section involves also the assistance to users when seeking information from the field of European statistics and the navigation at the Eurostat´s website.
The Office realised the activities in this field on the basis of gentlemen‘s agreement with Eurostat by means of the European Statistical Data Support Centre, established at the Central Office of the SO SR, within the international network
The Library ordered and registered 5 titles of newspapers and 23 journals, which were assigned to the Office`s divisions.
EUR 9000 were spent on the purchase of specialised literature and on the subscription of newspapers and journals.
During the year, 77 publications were issued, in total.
5 titles were published beyond the Catalogue.
Furthermore, 13 types of information and promotional newsletters were released from different statistical fields.
All publications were available at the Office´s website.
During the year, the Office regularly updated and extended the content of information at the Internet portal.
Within data visualization, the Eurostat´s interactive websites You in the EU and the Life of Women and Men in Europe-a statistical portrait have been made publicly available.
During the preparation for the 2017 elections to the bodies of self-governing regions, an interactive web presentation of the elections was provided.
The lay and the professional public actively used the information at the Office´s Internet portal which in 2017 was visited by 1 210 761 statistical users realizing 6 521 699 data extraction.
They were the most interested in the Register of Organisations, electronic data collection, statistics by individual fields, databases, classifications and samples of statistical forms.
In 2017, there was significant progress in the field of consolidation and modernisation of the
The innovated database concept facilitates searching, new tree menu navigation, short URL references and metadata access to the datacubes.
Data tables from the SLOVSTAT database (500 tables) were migrated into the new database.
The integration of databases comprehensively solved the uniform content availability of statistical data for customers with the consistent and comparable data and metadata with the possibility of creating own outputs.
The uniform public DATAcube. database contains 1168 datacubes and the STATdat. database contains 484 dynamic reports.
During the year, the DATAcube. was visited by 47 611 customers (by 38% more than in 2016).
The STAT
Sectoral statistics
Organisational statistics
Multi-domain statistics
Banking, finance, prices
Year 2016
dat. database was visited by 333 620 users (by 96% more than in 2016) and they realized 971 210 data extractions.
The highest interest was recorded for the indicators of consumer prices, population and migration, labour, labour costs, national accounts and industry.
The SOSR released 624 datasets, in total.
It took into account in their selection the importance, social demand and the interest of the public for the most requested data.
In accordance with the Strategy of the SOSR until 2017, the Office aims to systematically increase the value of the institution for the interested parties and its recognition at national and international level.
The Office monitors the fulfilment of this goal by means of the in
dicator of credibility of the Statistical Office
of the SR.
In 2017, the Office by means of an independent external organization conducted a credibility survey at the sample of 1006 inhabitants of the SR for people who are at least 18 years old.
According to the results of the satisfaction survey, 56% of respondents were satisfied with the SO SR.
The Office receives customer feedback by
means of the satisfaction survey of users with the products and services of the SOSR, con
out whose aim was to poll the opinion of customers on various types of products and services provided by the SOSR and ascertain the satisfaction of customers.
According to the 39 evaluated criteria (of products and services), the greatest advantages of the Office are the level of service provision by the employees, their responsiveness and willingness, expertise, level of information and consulting services.
From the statistical fields, demography, elections and referendum, labour market and prices, were the best rated.
Lower satisfaction was recorded in the availability of the searched information, logical breakdown and the orientation of users at the websites.
The obtained information and the respondents´ comments provided insights that will be taken into account in the creation and dissemination of the Office´s products and service provision.
Satisfied
Highly dissatisfied
The scientific Journal Slovak Statistics and Demography has undergone significant changes that positively affected the image formation of this modern periodical.
The Office continued in the activities aimed at the positive perception of the journal by the public and at the strengthening its market position, also in 2017.
The periodicity of the Slovak Statistics and Demography remained unchanged, four numbers of the journal published in 2017 provided an overview of the current statistical and demographic themes.
There was a continuing tradition of the journal´s monothematic issue which presented the methodologies of various statistical methods and procedures in order to underline the wide range of mathematic and statistical methods used in statistics as a scientific discipline.
A special issue of the journal draw attention to the diverse use of statistical methods and emphasized the growing social importance of statistics.
A special attention is paid to the promotion of the scientific peer-reviewed Journal Slovak Statistics and Demography.
The Editorial Board reports the content of each issue to the increased field of potential contributors, promoting interest in the publishing of the regular and new authors as well.
The print version of the journal continues to be available to the
readers, as well as the increasingly popular electronic version of the periodical, released at the website www.statistics.sk.
All recent initiatives of the journal´s Editorial Board aim at the incorporation of the Slovak Statistics and Demography into the international citation databases.
The Office followed to the maximum extent the knowledge, experience and mechanisms of the cooperation gained during the performance of the Presidency of the SR in the Council of the EU, during the second half of 2016.
The SOSR actively participated in debates at the meetings of the Council Working Party on Statistics, throughout the whole year.
The regulation, inter alia, addresses also the processing of personal data for statistical purposes.
In 2017, discussions on this topic have been going on not only at national level but also at the level of the Commission and Council working groups.
Due to the potential problems with the application of the regulation in the application practice, discussions and analysis of the impacts on the Office´s statistical systems and on the final version of sectoral statistical legal acts will be among the top priorities also in the coming years.
Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council adopted in October 2017, prolonging the European statistical programme to 2018-2020, provides framework for the development, production and dissemination of European statistics and setting out the main areas and the objectives of the actions planned for the period corresponding to the period of multiannual financial framework.
In the approval process at the EU level, attention was paid mainly to two framework regulations, presented by the Commission within the programme of regulatory suitability and the effectiveness of the REFIT.
Integrated Regulation for European statistics relating to persons and households, based on data at individual level collected from samples, is the first framework regulation in the field of statistics, presented within this initiative.
In addition to the legislation of technical statistical issues, it should introduce a new model of legal architecture of statistic framework regulations.
The Office actively participated also in negotiations on the Integrated Regulation on Farm statistics which should guarantee comparability and consistency of agricultural data, in a long-term perspective, mainly in relation to the Census of Agriculture planned for 2020.
Following the submission of the draft to the European Parliament and the Council in March 2017 leading to the adoption of the regulation at EU level, within the inter-governmental review process, the Office confirmed the position on a draft regulation and received negotiation mandate at the Council Working Party on Statistics.
The Office was active also in the field of international relations, mainly within the European Statistical System (ESS).
In 2017, the Office´s employees attended
184 foreign business trips, representing
241 individual travels while some travels included participation in various events.
The travels were realized mainly to the seat of Eurostat in Luxembourg.
Within the ESS, the Office´s employees participated in 100 meetings of the working groups and committees, 22 smaller working groups (so-called task force), 15 seminars and workshops, 7 courses within the European Statistical Training Programme (ESTP) and 6 events related to the implementation of grant projects.
Meetings of working groups and committees focused on the proper implementation of European legislation and the task force on the development of new methodology and legislation.
The Office´s managers
Percentage share of different types of events targeted in the foreign business trips
attended the meetings of director groups in respective statistical fields.
The President of the Office represented the national statistical system in four meetings of the European Statistical System Committee (ESSC), conference of the leaders of the national statistical institutions (DGINS) and at the strategic meeting of leaders of the national statistical offices of EU countries and Eurostat devoted the ESS strategy after 2020.
The employees of the Office participated in 13 meetings of the Council Working Party on Statistics, thus contributing to the European legislation approval process in the field of statistics.
Outside the ESS, the Office´s employees took part in 19 events organized by international organizations, mainly the OECD and the UN.
In terms of bilateral and regional cooperation, 15 representatives travelled to the neighbouring countries.
The reciprocal visit of the management of the CZSO took place in Bratislava, in September 2017.
During the year, in total, 25 projects have been implemented together with those from the previous year.
In 2017, 810,3 employees (the average registered recalculated number) were employed in the SO SR, of whom 304,7 employees at the Office‘s Central and 505,6 at the Regional Offices of the SOSR(including the Section of Industrial Data Collection and Processing and Field Surveys in Banská Bystrica).
In the national budget, in the chapter concerning the SO SR, the number of posts was curtailed to 832, while in the Central Office, 7 posts were designed for the fulfilment of special tasks in the field the 2021 Population and Housing Census (2021 Census).
78,0 % women and 22,0 % men worked at
the Office.
Out of 124 managers, there were 71,0 % women and 29,0 % men.
In 2017, the available budget of the SOSR
was EUR 9 925 238 for salary appropria
tions (in the amount are also included salary appropriations intended for the 2021 Census and elections to higher territorial units).
For the period January - December 2017, the expenditure was EUR 9 903 540, hence the limit for the obligatory indicator for wages, salaries, pays, and others personal surcharge was complied, in 2017 has been respected.
Complete secondary with school-leaving examination;
Tertiary 1st stage;
Tertiary 2nd stage;
The range of educational activities has been continuously complemented by further educational requirements, promptly submitted by the respective organizational units.
Within further training, the employees of the SOSR attended activities relating to legislation in the field of wages, taxes, social and health security, accounting, public procurement, human resource management, controlling, audit etc.
The Office´s staff participated in 38 foreign educational activities (international workshops, courses, seminars and conferences of educational character) where beyond competence development they had the opportunity to share knowledge and expertise on the national and European statistical system with other participants.
Professional courses organized within the programme European Statistical Training Programme were beneficial for the Office´s experts in their professional advancement.
The language training was provided
through seven semi-intensive English group courses.
In 2017, EUR 46 672 were used by the Office for educational purposes.
In the context of accomplishing the goals of the National Concept of Informatization of Public Administration (NKIVS), the electronic
collection of statistical data has been realized
for the second consecutive year by the SO SR which also increased the return and quality of data also due to pre-filling of data and the checks implemented in the electronic forms.
The SOSR also provides its electronic services on its own portal by means of the Central Portal of Public Administration (CPPA).
In order to reduce the administrative burden of reporting units (RU), the SOSR extends
the range of the used administrative sourc
es which replace the data originally obtained from the RU or complete the statistical data collected from the RU.
The Office also started preparing the data collection from the administrative systems of the RU (accounting systems, wage systems etc.) by which the statistical reports will partly or completely be filled.
tities, Entrepreneurs and Public Authorities
Another type of data transmission is the direct connection of the information system of the liable person to the RLE via web services.
RPO as a reference register provides other public authorities the possibility to receive data in an automated manner, free of charge.
Following the Call for applications for non-refundable financial aid (thereinafter “NRFA“), the SOSR applied for the NRFA on September 29, 2017.
On 20th November 2017, the Office concluded a contract for granting of the NRFA
for the project The reform of the processing of statistical data in public administration
within the operational programme Efficient public administration and it undertook the necessary steps leading to the call for tenders for the subject matter of the contract.
methodology, its subsequent uniformization towards the liable persons of the statistical surveys enabling streamlining of the collection process and processing of statistical data of all liable persons as well as the protection and security of the collected and processed data.
The project outputs will represent a uniform and harmonised methodology, applicable by all liable persons of the National Statistical System.
In 2017, the SOSR began implementing the
project Merging statistics and geospatial information in MS-Support policy-making by the use of spatial information by ensur
The project will continue even in 2018 and its outcome will be the disclosure of map outputs for the internal users of the SOSR resulting in the expansion of the Office´s publications by cartographic outputs.
tion of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data (GDPR), the SOSR
carried out an analysis of the current situation of ensuring the protection of the existing personal data.
In 2017, the modernisation of the Oracle Database environment was finalized,
thereby fulfilling the objectives of the SOSR towards the creation of the highly accessible database platform of the operation of critical information systems.
The rapidly changing and accumulating threats facing the information systems accessible via internet require continual improvement and modernization of the IT security systems from the provider like the SO SR.
In 2017, the SOSR modernized its primary firewalls and implemented cluster solutions of the next-generation firewalls- Next Generation Firewall- NGFW.
Next year, the SOSR plans to implement the Web Application Firewalls (WAF) that identify and protect websites and web applications from hackers using vulnerable applications or protocols for data theft or changing the appearance of the organization´s websites.
Increasing IT security has constantly been initiated and supported also by the European Commission and Eurostat.
During 2017, the budget of the Office was adjusted by 18 budgetary measures of the Ministry of Finance of the SR to EUR 23 711 037,61.
for the surveys relating to the production and implementation of the Tourism Satellite Account (EUR 302 076), for the valorisation of personal expenses (EUR 554 457), for ensuring funding for sending of passwords and access codes to new statistical units by registered mail with return receipt (EUR 254 952), for financing the one-off programme change of the IEIS (EUR 111 200) and an increase of the current expenditure limit due to the lack of budget means for the Office`s regular activity (EUR 530 Thous.).
Adjusted budget
For the year 2017, the indicator for a binding revenue limit -in the amount of EUR 120 000 was approved for the SO SR.
The budgetary measure of the Ministry of Finance of the SR decreased the limit of revenues to EUR 89 510.
The revenues de facto reached EUR 1 245 458, of which non-tax revenues constituted EUR 102 757 and extra-budgetary from foreign grants, in the amount of EUR 1 142 701, provided by the European Commission with the aim of implementing new statistical surveys.
A binding indicator - non-tax revenueswas exceeded compared with the adjusted the budget by EUR 13 247.
The adjusted budget of expenditures amounted to EUR 23 711 037,61 was drawn actually in the amount of EUR 24 831 098.
The real drawing of expenditures includes budget expenditures in the amount of EUR 23 688 397 i.e. to 99,9 % and extra-budgetary expenditures in the amount of EUR 1 142 701, of which the chapter was authorised to exceed the limit of expenditures, pursuant to the Article 23 of the Act on the Budget Rules.
Budget for the insurance payments and for the insurance contribution covered by an employer was in the amount of EUR 3 967 301, of which EUR 208 484 from the budget for the Elections to the HTU, EUR 37 839 from the budget for the 2021 Census and EUR 265 295 were used from the extrabudgetary resources.
In total, EUR 7 827 478 were used for goods and services, of which EUR 341 127 from the funds for the Elections to the HTU, EUR 114 419 from the funds for the 2021 Census, EUR 4 163 874 from the funds allocated for the information technologies financed from the state budget and EUR 268 295 were used from extra-budgetary resources.
EUR 2 939 763 were spent on ordinary activities of the SOSR, mainly on the statistical surveys, travel costs, costs related to the processing of statistical information, contribution to the social fund and catering of employees.
A substantial share was represented by expenditures on energies and communication, object security and operation of motor vehicles and maintenance of operating machines, equipment and buildings.
Current transfers were drawn in the amount of EUR 1 084 136 of which EUR 959 184 were assigned to the subsidised organisation - INFOSTAT.
Capital expenditures were drawn in the amount of EUR 1 439 532 of which EUR 1 364 138 were for information technology financed from the state budget.
Resources for supporting activities in the amount of EUR 75 394 were used for the purchase of passenger cars and operating machines and equipment.
Elections to Higher Territorial Units
In total, EUR 1 028 035 were spent on the Elections to Higher Territorial Units.
Expenditures incurred mainly for the overtime payments, remunerations and related insurance contributions of employees involved in the processing of result of the Elections to Higher Territorial Units.
Expenditures on goods and services were spent on material provision of expert summary units, telecommunication services, technical assistance services, general material and on agreement for the performance of work.
the preparation of the 2021 Census, strategy development and promotion of the 2021 Census and feasibility studies of the 2021 Census exclusively on the basis of electronic data collection.
Information technologies financed from the state budget-SOSR
Funds in the amount of EUR 5 528 012 were spent from the state budget on information technologies, including goods and services in the amount of EUR 4 163 874 and capital expenditure in the amount of EUR 1 364 138.
Priorities 2018
Within the system development, another significant priority will be the development of the new Development Strategy of the SOSR for the next strategic period with the goals and action programmes reflecting the results and analyses of the external environment (including the development in the European Statistical System) and the internal environment ensuring further development of the SOSR.
At international level, the priority will be an active participation in the activities of the 2020 Vision Steering Committee for horizontal project, focused on the extension of the common quality framework of the ESS to coincide with the development of the quality management system.
In the field of methodology, intensive efforts will be continued on the project Scanner Data, mainly in the field of testing their processing for price statistics.
During 2018, quality reports for the users of statistical outputs in a uniform European metadata structure will gradually be released at the website of the SOSR.
The publication of the new calibration tool Calif 4.0 is planned by the Office.
The Office plans to introduce the new version of Calif at the conference QUALITY 2018 in Krakow and, possibly, on other conferences, it shall present it to Austrian and Czech colleagues and via of Eurostat extend and implement it in other statistical offices as well.
In the field of classifications and code lists,
ensuring their compliance with the legally binding acts of the European Union, international norms and standards remains a priority.
In the field of statistical registers and statistical units, focus will be on the ensuring of methodological and substantive requirements for the statistical registers, resulting from the proposal of the new Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on European business statistics.
In terms of the RLE, the main goal will be the integration of all the remaining source registers into the RLE, as it is laid down by the Article 12 of the Act No 272/2015 Coll. on the Register of Legal Entities, Entrepreneurs and.
Governmental Bodies, as amended.
An annual priority in the database production of the SOSR is the review of requirements of the Programme of State Statistical Surveys in order to carry out important and necessary surveys and comply with the principle of economy.
A special attention will be placed on ensuring of data for the purpose of monitoring the goals of the Agenda 2030.
In the long term, increasing the efficiency and decreasing costeffectiveness of the production of database and the respondents´ administrative burden should be achieved by progressive integration of data from other data sources to the production of the Office´s database.
The aim is that data from internal statistical surveys are combined, complemented or replaced with data from external statistical surveys, administrative sources, accounting systems of enterprises or private-sector data sources.
In the field of macroeconomic statistics, ac
tivities in 2018 will be focused on the task fulfilments resulting from the conclusions of the Eurostat missions on the EDP and GNI and completing the activities of the of the grant project GP 06-16 on the implementation of the ESA 2010 methodology.
Attention will be paid to the preparation of documents for the second mission of Eurostat in the second half of 2018 and to a subsequent fulfilment of the action points resulting from its conclusions, preparation of the development of the GDP flash estimates in the short term, as well as to the expanded publishing of external trade statistics in a uniform public database DATAcube.
The SOSR will also cooperate in the preparation of the implemented and delegated acts on the Framework Regulation Integrating the European Business Statistics (FRIBS), concerning external trade statistics.
Among the Office´s important tasks in the field of business statistics, will continue to be the preparation of coordinated positions of the SOSR on the proposal for the FRIBS Regulation, negotiated in the Council and on the proposed implementing and delegated acts to the regulation within Eurostat working groups.
During the year, work will continue regarding updating of metadata reports for 2017 in short-term statistics and the production
of quality reports for structural statistics and foreign affiliates statistics in the ESS-Metadata Handler environment.
In tourism statistics, the focus will be on the updating of the Register of accommodation establishments based on the results of statistical survey from the Questionnaire for the updating of the Register of tourist accommodation establishments.
In environmental statistics, special focus will be put on data quality enhancement for the three new environmental accounts (EPEA, EGSS, PEFA).
In 2018, in science, technology and innovations statistics, activities will be focused on the implementation of changes resulting from the revised Frascati manual.
From the survey on innovations, compulsory outputs will be processed, transmitted to Eurostat and after the publishing of results, the quality report on innovation statistics will subsequently be provided.
In energy statistics, continued attention will be paid to the implementation of the new requirements on annual surveys resulting from changes of the regulation.
The first mandatory data submission on prices of fuel and energy consumption in households according to their type of use as well as the first data submission of electricity and gas prices by components, will be realized in accordance with the new methodology.
The most important task of price statistics will be the continued implementation of data obtained from retail chains into the production of consumer prices.
The priorities of sample surveys in social statistics, which are based on data on individuals and households, will include mainly the conduct of the follow-up survey on reconciliation of work and family life in the 2.half of 2018 and commenting of the proposal of the Framework Regulation on Integrated European Social Statistics (IESS).
Activities that are particularly important include the preparation of the EU legislation, regarding the forthcoming implementation of this framework regulation and also the activities supported by Eurostat grants for the modernisation of fields covered by it.
In this context, the preparation of the revision of EU SILC-testing of rolling modules in EU SILC and modernisation of the harmonised European Time Use Surveys (TUS) should be mentioned.
As for the 2021 Population and Housing Census preparation, in 2018, activities will be targeted mainly at tasks aimed at harmonisation
of data of demographic statistics and data
from the administrative sources and registers, drafting the Law on the 2021 Census, implementation of activities from the National Action Plan to the 2021 Population and Housing Census as well as the territorial planning of the 2021 Census and setting the basis for fieldwork.
The priority of election statistics will be the processing of election results to the bodies of self-governing regions of the Slovak Republic.
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
In the field of provision and dissemination of statistical information, the Office will fo
cus on the meeting of the marketing objectives in order to identify its customer needs more efficiently and satisfy their increasing demands in relation to the complexity and quality of products and services.
The main focus will be on the processing and provision of data files for the national and international institutions, as well as on arranging activities aimed at communication with the users of statistics.
Within external communication, the Office will organize meetings with the key customers aiming to expand their knowledge on the possible uses of statistical products and services and identify their needs.
The Office will intensify communication with selected customer groups through presentations, scientific lectures and seminars.
Several activities will be conducted in connection with the celebrations of the European Statistics Day.
The main effort will be to present to the public the mission of official statistics, products and services and thus improving statistical literacy.
The Office´s portal will continue to play a crucial role in the dissemination of statistical information.
Visualisation tools will also be used in the Office´s publication activities.
In the area of open data access, the SOSR will ensure the release of new datasets, improving the quality of data and metadata pursuant to the Public administration information system (PAIS).
When selecting new datasets, the importance and public interest in the data requested shall be taken into account.
In the field of international activities, the
priorities in 2018 remain the active participation in the adoption of the European statistical legislation within the Council and supporting active participation in international conferences within the ESS and other international forums.
The organisational activities will be intensified for the preparation of conference of the leaders of national statistical institutions which will be held at the beginning of October 2019, in Bratislava.
Within the cooperation in V4 countries, cooperation is expected to be launched as well as the exchange of experiences in the agreed statistical fields.
In the field of human resources management, in limited financial sources and personal capacities, the motivation of employees to perform tasks to the best of their ability and the satisfaction of their wage claims above the national average, will continue to be a challenge.
In hard conditions, the Office will make its best for the stabilisation of effective, key and committed employees.
Ensuring staffing for the conduct of specific tasks
Priorities 2018
of the 2021 Census and the elections to the municipal bodies will be an important priority.
In 2018, the purpose of education forming employee competences and skills will be the continuous and effective development of the knowledge and skills of managers and other employees so that they can perform the Office´s tasks in a professional, flexible and objective manner.
A special challenge will be the high quality staff training for the processing of results of the elections to the bodies of self-governing regions.
In the field of vocational statistical education, the education system of employees will continue to be streamlined which was established according to individual plans of competency education of civil servants, containing first-time implemented outputs of the new competency matrices of employees.
On the basis of the draft legislation, the SOSR plans the extension of the RLE system to the Register of end-users of benefits.
The Office plans to reconcile the protection of personal data with the Regulation of the EU on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on free movement of such data (GDPR).
It will also implement the project Reform of the collection and processing of statistical data in public administration under the Operational Programme Effective Public Administration and prepare the project Unified Information System for the collection and analysis of statistical data in the National Statistical System, to be carried out under the Operational Programme Integrated Infrastructure.
applicable as of Dec.
31, 2017
Annual Report of the Statistical Office of the SR
applicable as of Dec.
31, 2017
Telephone: +421-2-50236 211
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Bratislava Hanulova 5/c
Telephone: +421-2-69250 101
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Nitra Rázusova 9
Mo - Tue 8.30 - 12.00 13.00 - 14.30
Statistical Office of the SR - Regional Office Prešov Plzenská 2
Telephone: +421-55-6410 200
Mo - Tue 8.00 - 12.00
Mo, Tue, Thur 8.30 - 10.00 14.00 - 15.00
